Wild Weather
® by Joanna Korba • illustrated by Anita DuFalla
42185_BK.indd   2 7/8/19   5:18 PM
SCIENCE
Earth & Space Science
 
LEVELS  40–60  R–X
 
TOTAL WORDS: 1,787
Reader’s Theater
B e n c h m a r k  e d u c a t i o n  c o m p a n y 
145 Huguenot Street • New Rochelle, NY • 10801
Editor: Jeffrey Fuerst 
Creative Director: Jonette Jakobson 
Illustrator: Anita DuFalla
© Benchmark Education Company, LLC. All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. Printed in Canada.
ISBN: 978-1-4108-4218-3
For ordering information, call Toll-Free 1-877-236-2465 or visit our Web site at www.benchmarkeducation.com.
42185_BK.indd   3 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild  Weather
C H A R A C T E R S
Narrator
Dad 
Mom 
Jen  McCloud
Max  McCloud
Sonny  Skye
Heather  Shady
S E T T I N G
The  McClouds’  home
42185_BK.indd   1 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Narrator:  Something  strange  is  about  to  happen  at  the 
McCloud  home.  Middle-school  students  Jen  and  Max  
are  going  to  find  out  just  how  dangerous  it  can  be  
to  mess  with  Mother  Nature.  But  for  the  moment,  all  
is  calm.  So  let’s  join  Mr.  and  Mrs.  McCloud,  Jen,  and  
Max  as  they  prepare  to  watch  their  favorite  TV  show.
Dad:  I  have  a  feeling  that  “What’s  up  with  the  
Weather?”  is  going  to  be  exciting  tonight.  I’m  getting 
that  tingly  feeling  I  get  when  it  is  about  to  rain,    
only  more  intense.
Mom:  Hurry,  Max  and  Jen!  The  show’s  about  to  start.
Jen:  I  was  just  putting  the  finishing  touches  on  my  
report  on  extreme  weather.
Max:  And  I  was  finishing  a  chapter  in  this  cool  new  
book  about—
Dad:  Do  that  after  the  show.  Shh!  The  theme  music  
is  over,  which  means—
Sonny:  Good  evening,  weather  watchers.  This  is  
Sonny  Skye,  your  Weather  Guy.
Heather:  And  I’m  Heather  Shady,  your  Weather  Lady.
2
42185_BK.indd   2 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
Mom,  Dad,  Jen,  and  Max:  Hi,  Sonny!  Hi,  Heather!
Sonny:  Welcome  to  another  edition  of  “What’s  up  
with  the  Weather?”—the  show  that  reports  on   
newsworthy  weather  all  over  the  world.
Heather:  We’ve  got  a  captivating  show  this  evening.  
We’ll  have  live  footage  of  a  tropical  storm  forming  in  
the  Pacific  Ocean  that  may  develop  into  a  full-scale  
hurricane.
Mom:  That  means  winds  blowing  at  over  seventy-five  
miles  per  hour.
Sonny:  But  first,  we  want  to  alert  our  viewers  in  the 
northern  states  that  a  large  storm  on  the  sun  has  
created  some  strong  solar  winds.  These  can  cause  an  
aurora  borealis,  also  called  the  Northern  Lights.  The  
Northern  Lights  can  provide  a  spectacular  display  of  
shimmering  light  in  the  sky.
Mom,  Dad,  Jen,  and  Max:  We  already  know  that!
Heather:  We’re  expecting  the  display  to  begin  around  
midnight  tomorrow.  Clear  skies  are  predicted,  so  be  sure 
to  set  up  chairs  in  your  backyard  and  enjoy  the  show!
3
42185_BK.indd   3 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Mom,  Dad,  Jen,  and  Max:  Oooooooh!  We  will!
Narrator:  The  McClouds  stay  glued  to  the  tube  for  
the  next  hour.  Then,  Max  and  Jen  go  into  the   
family  room  to  work  on  their  school  projects.  
Jen:  Can  I  go  online  to  do  research  for  my  report?
Max:  Go  ahead . . .  I’m  still  reading  this  fantastic  new 
science  fiction  book  called  Storms  of  Zelcon.  It   turned  
up  in  bookstores  and  libraries,  and  now  everyone’s  
reading  it.
Jen:  That’s  kind  of  weird—what’s  it  about?
Max:  It’s  about  this  planet  named  Zelcon  that’s  ruled  
by  warrior  kings  and  queens.  The  planet  used  to  
have  terrible  weather—firestorms  and  snowstorms  that  
would  make  everyone  forget  what  just  happened.  
They  called  them  the  Snows  of  Forgetfulness.
Jen:  That  definitely  sounds  like   
something  I’d  like  to  read.   
But  right  now,  I’ve  got   
to  surf  the  Net  for  some   
extreme  weather  sites  and  . . .  
4
42185_BK.indd   4 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
Max:  But  I  didn’t  tell  you  the  main  plot  point.  The  
Zelcons  learn  to  control  their  weather  and  then  they  
begin  to  use  firestorms  and  Snows  of  Forgetfulness  
to  conquer  other  worlds  and . . .  what’s  the  matter?
Jen:  I  typed  in  the  wrong  URL . . .  and  now . . .  
whoa!  Take  a  look  at  this  site,  Max!
Max:  What  a  weird  name:  “Wild  Weather,  a  
Simulation  Exercise.”
Jen:  It  looks  like  a  game.  The  directions  say  it’s  “for  
two  or  more  people  to  play.  If  they  dare.”  Should  I  
download  it?
Max:  Definitely.  We  can  do  our  homework  later.  
Where  are  your  priorities?  Remember,  we  are  
McClouds  and  weather  is  in  our  name.
5
42185_BK.indd   5 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Narrator:  Jen  downloads  “Wild  Weather,”  which  
begins  innocently  enough.  They  learn  that  each  player  
will  be  asked  a  question  about  the  weather.  A   
correct  answer  will  allow  that  player  to  choose  any  
place  on  Earth  and  create  weather  for  it.  A  computer 
simulation  instantly  shows  what  happens.
Jen:  I’m  first.  My  question  is,  “What  happens  when  
water  droplets  in  the  cold  upper  regions  of  a   
thundercloud  keep  colliding  into  one  another  until  
layers  of  ice  form  around  them?”  That’s  easy:  you  
get  hailstones.  Now  we  get  to  click  on  any  part  of  
the  world  and  create  instant  weather  for  it.
Max:  I’ve  always  wondered  what  it  would  look  like   
if  it  snowed  in  the  tropics.
Jen:  Okay,  I’m  picking  a  small  island  in  the  South  
Pacific  that  doesn’t  have  any  people  on  it.
Max:  What  does  that  matter?
Jen:  It’s  not  right  to  make  unsuspecting  people  freeze  
to  death,  even  if  they  are  computer-generated,  Max!  
Okay,  now  I’ll  click  on  “blizzard”  and  hit  enter.
6
42185_BK.indd   6 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
Max:  Look  at  that!  Palm  trees  covered  with  snow!  
It’s  fun  to  control  the  weather.  Hey  wait,  isn’t  that  
an   airplane  in  the  sky  over  the  island?  Why  would  
an  airplane  be  in  a  computer  simulation?
Dad:  Kids,  come  in  here  immediately!  Something  
amazing  is  happening!
Narrator:  Jen  and  Max  run  into  the  living  room.  A  
special  weather  bulletin  is  on  TV.
Mom:  This  is  incredible.  How  could  it  be  happening?
Sonny:  No,  you’re  not  dreaming,  folks—that’s  snow  
falling  on  a  tiny  tropical  island  in  the  Pacific.  We’re  
getting  this  video  live  from  our  “What’s  up  with  the  
Weather?”  plane  checking  on  the  tropical  storm  we  
told  you  about  earlier.
Heather:  This  is  no  tropical  storm,  Sonny.  At   
the  rate  this  snow is  falling,  I’d  say  it’s  a  good   
old-fashioned  blizzard!
Mom  and  Dad:  Oh,  my!
Jen  and  Max:  Uh-oh!
7
42185_BK.indd   7 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Sonny:  This  is  a  first,  folks.  You’re  seeing  an  arctic  
blizzard  on  a  tropical  island!
Heather:  Brrrrr.  Any  tropical  birds  on  that  island  had 
better  head  farther  south  for  the  winter!
Mom:  This  is  awful.  The  animals  won’t  be  able  to  
get  away.  They’ll  have  no  protection  against  this  kind 
of  weather!
Dad:  And  don’t  forget  the  plants.  They  won’t  survive  
in  low  temperatures  either.  They  have  adapted  to  
warm  tropical  temperatures,  not  arctic  cold.
8
42185_BK.indd   8 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
Jen:  Max,  we  didn’t  think  of  that!  We’ve  got  to  get  
back  to  the  computer!
Narrator:  Jen  and  Max  are  stunned.  Have  they  really  
caused  this  wild  weather  just  by  playing  a  game  on  
the  computer?  After  all,  there  was  a  storm  already  
forming  in  the  South  Pacific.  Maybe  it  isn’t  their  
fault.  They  have  to  find  out,  so  Jen  makes  the  snow  
stop  falling  in  the  game,  and  then . . .
Jen:  We  need  to  do  something  so  bizarre  that  we’ll  
know  it’s  us  causing  the  wild  weather.  But  we  have  
to  make  sure  we  don’t  hurt  any  plant  or  animal  life  
in  the  process!
Max:  Hmm . . .  no  plant  or  animal  life.  There’s  one  
place  I  can  think  of  that  fits  that  description—the  
Ténéré.
Jen:  Where  and  what  is  the  Ténéré?
Max:  Ténéré  is  an Arabic  word  meaning  “nothingness”  
or  “empty,”  and  it’s  a  part  of  the  Sahara  that  can  
go  for  years  without  rain.  There’s  nothing  but  sand  
there—absolutely  nothing.
9
42185_BK.indd   9 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Jen: The  deadest  part  of  the  Sahara  Desert—that’s  a  
perfect  spot  to  pick,  Max.  Since  it  barely  ever  rains  
there,  let’s  have  the  game  cause  a  sudden,  torrential  
downpour.
Max:  Make  it  a  major  thunderstorm,  with  lightning  
and  hailstones  the  size  of  softballs.  The  climate  in  
the  Ténéré  is  all  wrong  for  hail.  
Jen:  We’ve  got  ourselves  a  plan,  Max,  but  first  we  
have  to  answer  another  weather  question.  Here  it  is:  
“What  do  you  call  the  boundary  between  two  air  
masses  with  different  temperatures?”
Max:  Simple.  It’s  a  front,  of  course,  and  technically,  
the  air  masses  also  have  different  humidity  levels.
10
42185_BK.indd   10 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
Jen:  Right  again,  so  let  me  launch  our  major   
thunderstorm  in  the  Ténéré. . .  there!
Max:  That  looks  awesome!
Dad:  Kids,  come  here,  quickly!  There’s  another   
unbelievable  bit  of  weather  happening,  now  in   
northern  Africa!  We’re  about  to  see  the  first-ever   
desert  typhoon!
Narrator:  Max  and  Jen  run  in  to  find  their  parents  
talking  about  the  weather  while  they  await  another  
special  weather  bulletin.
Mom:  Actually,  dear,  I  don’t  believe  it  is  a  typhoon.  
A  typhoon  is  a  cyclone  that  forms  over  the  Pacific  
or  Indian  Ocean.
Dad:  You’re  right—a  typhoon  is  also  what  we  call  a  
hurricane  that  forms  over  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  What  I 
meant  to  say  was  monsoon.
Mom:  Yes,  a  monsoon  would  fit,  dear.  It’s  a  period  
of  heavy  rains  and  wind,  although  monsoons  only  
occur  in  southern  Asia,  and  this  storm  is  in  Africa.
Max:  I’m  going  to  guess  you’re  talking  about  a  sudden 
thunderstorm  in  the  Ténéré  region  of  the  Sahara.
11
42185_BK.indd   11 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Mom:  How  on  Earth  could  you  possibly  know  that? 
Hold  on,  here’s  Sonny  with  more  details.
Sonny:  This  is  another  special  weather  bulletin.  A  
major  thunderstorm  has  struck  the  remote  Ténéré  
region  of  the  Sahara.  It’s  pouring  rain  where  no  
rain  was  predicted  for  the  next  few  years!
Heather:  Well,  I  guess  any  birds  that  live  there   
had  better  migrate  farther  south. . . .  oh,  wait!   
There  aren’t  any  birds  in  the  Ténéré.  In  fact,  there’s  
nothing  in  the  Ténéré,  nothing  but  sand  dunes.
12
42185_BK.indd   12 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
Sonny:  You’re  correct,  Heather,  but  as  those  sand  
dunes  soak  up  more  and  more  rain,  there  are  going  
to  be  massive  mudslides!
Heather:  And  that’s  not  all,  Sonny.  We’re  getting  
word  that  something  else  is  happening  that’s  never  
happened  before  in  the  history  of  the  Ténéré . . .
Jen  and  Max:  Hailstones  are  coming  down.
Heather:  Hailstones  are  coming  down.
Dad:  What’s  going  on  here?  What  are  you  two  up  to?
Mom:  I  think  you  owe  us  an  explanation.
Narrator:  Jen  and  Max  tell  their  parents  about  the  
strange  weather  game  they  found  on  the  Internet,  
and  they  explain  what  they  have  done  to  the   
weather  in  the  Sahara.
Dad:  We’ve  got  to  stop  this  lunatic  game  before  
something  even  more  terrible  happens!  Hurry,   
everyone,  back  to  the  computer!
Jen:  Let  me  stop  the  rainstorm  first,  and  then  I’ll  
close  the  game  and  trash  it.
13
42185_BK.indd   13 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Mom:  That’s  not  enough,  Jen.  You’ve  got  to  remove  
this  game  from  the  Internet  altogether  so  no  one  
else  plays  it.  Other  players  might  not  care  about  the  
damage  they  do—to  plants,  animals,  or  people!
Jen:  You  don’t  have  to  make  me  any  more  worried  
than  I  am!  Just  a  minute . . .  wait,  what’s  this?  The  
game  has  disappeared!  It  says  that  the  Web  site  has  
been  shut  down  because  the  “game  is  no  longer   
necessary.”  Huh?
Mom:  Good!  They  should  never  have  created  such  a  
dangerous  game  in  the  first  place!  Let’s  just  hope  no 
one  else  found  that  site  before  it  was  shut  down.
Dad:  Uh-oh,  I  think  someone  else  did  find  it.
Mom:  What  makes  you  say  that?
Max:  Come  over  to  the  window  and  look  at  this!  
There  are  fireballs  falling  from  the  sky!
Mom:  Everyone  head  for  the  basement . . .  NOW!
Sonny:  This  is  an  emergency  alert,  I  repeat,  this  is  
an  emergency  alert . . .  this  is  not  a  test!
14
42185_BK.indd   14 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Wild Weather
15
42185_BK.indd   15 7/8/19   5:18 PM
READER’S THEATER
Heather:  Firestorms  have  sprung  up  all  over  the  
world.  Everyone  should  seek  shelter  immediately!  
Narrator:  Controlling  the  weather  is  no  game,  so  
who  could  be  playing  now?  Gee,  it’s  starting  to   
snow . . .  and  it  is  so  pretty,  I  could  look  at  it  all  
day . . .  now,  what  was  I  talking  about?
The End
16
42185_BK.indd   16 7/8/19   5:18 PM
Reader’s Theater
G L O S S A R Y
air  mass  (AHR  MASS):  a  large  body  of  air  
that  has  a  certain  temperature  and  humidity
aurora  borealis  (uh-ROAR-uh  bore-ee-AL-
us):  bright,  colorful  bands  or  streams  of  light  
sometimes  seen  in  northern  night  skies 
 
blizzard  (BLIH-zurd):  a  powerful  snowstorm  
with  winds  blowing  over  35  miles  per  hour
front  (FRUNT):  the  border  between  two  air  
masses  of  differing  temperature  and  humidity
hurricane  (HUR-ih-KAYN):  a  large,  powerful  
tropical  rainstorm  that  develops  in  the  Atlantic 
Ocean  with  winds  rotating  around  at  over      
75  miles  per  hour
monsoon  (mon-SOON):  a  long  period  of  
heavy  rain  and  high  winds  that  occurs  in  the  
summer  in  southern  Asia
tropical  storm  (TROP-ik-ul  STORM):  a  strong  
rainstorm  with  winds  rotating  around  at         
30  to  75  miles  per  hour
42185_BK.indd   17 7/8/19   5:18 PM
SCIENCE
Here are other Reader’s Theater 
scripts covering a range of science 
topics at this reading level.
Levels N–X  
Earth & Space Science Wild  Weather
Above the Clouds
Pele’s Fire
Save the Fairy Penguins There’s  an  old  saying: 
Star-Melon Seeds
The Three Sisters  everyone  talks  about  the  
Tornado! weather,  but  nobody  does        
History & the Nature of Science
One Giant Leap anything  about  it.  Well,  
Life Science    that  is  about  to  change . . . 
The Dodo’s Last Stand
Path from Extinction
The S.H.A. Club
Physical Science
Isaac Newton: The World in Motion
The Matter Marvels
Science & Technology About the Playwright
Trivia Pursuit
Science in Personal  Joanna  has  been  a  children’s  author 
and Social Perspectives
 for  more  than  15  years,  but  she  
Clara Barton: Angel of the Battlefield has  been  writing  and  drawing  for  
Mutant Bugs  
Return to Earth much  longer  than  that.  “I  wrote  and  illustrated  
Space Pox my  first  book,  about  a  horse  named  Golden  
Wild Bill Hiccups Gleam,  when  I  was  four,”  she  says.  “It  took  
quite  a  long  time—I  had  to  keep  asking  my  
mother  how  to  spell  all  the  words.” 
Look for many other titles 
covering math, science,  
& social studies topics 
for grades 1 to 6.
www.benchmarkeducation.com 
8 7 7 - 2 3 6 - 2 4 6 5
® B e n c h m a r k  e d u c a t i o n  c o m p a n y
42185_BK.indd   1 7/8/19   5:18 PM

W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
Grade 5
W R I T E R ’ S
VOLUME
W O R K S H O PTM
W R I T E R ’ S
TW OeR K SsHtO-PTM Taking 5
as a Genre
TEACHER’S  
RESOURCE SYSTEM
® B e n c h m a r k  e d u c a t i o n  c o m p a n y
Y42185_TRS_G5_Vol5_CV.indd   1 10/24/19   12:22 PM
Y43339_G5_V2_CV_BC_TEX.indb   1 6/13/19   4:21 PM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
W R I T E R ’ S Grade 5
W O R K S H O P VOLUME
TM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O P 5
TM
Test-Taking 
as a Genre
TEACHER’S  
RESOURCE SYSTEM
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC I
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_TOC_Authors_Credits.indd   1 10/24/19   11:47 AM
TM
Development Team
Authors
Peter Afflerbach, Ph.D., University of Maryland  
Allison Briceño, Ed.D., San Jose State University
Silvia Dorta-Duque de Reyes, M.A., Benchmark Education Company 
Linda Hoyt, M.A., Author and Literacy Consultant 
Adria Klein, Ph.D., California State University, San Bernardino 
Patty McGee, M.Ed., Author and Literacy Consultant
Jeff Zwiers, Ed.D., Stanford University
Consultants
Wiley Blevins, Ed. M., Literacy Consultant
René Boyer, Ed.D., Senior Consultant
Michael Priestley, M.A., Assessment Consultant
Benchmark WorkshopTM
BENCHMARK  EDUCAT ION  COMPANY
145 Huguenot Street • New Rochelle, NY 10801
For ordering information, call toll-free 1-877-236-2465 
or visit our website at www.benchmarkeducation.com.
Photo credits: Front CoverA: Syda Productions/Shutterstock; Front CoverB,AR1,Pages iii,  4B,5B,6B,7B,9, TABS 1A,2,3A,4,5A,6: Artikal/Shutterstock; 
Back CoverA: hocus-focus/Getty images; Back CoverB: tulcarion/Getty Images; Back CoverC: Amorphis/Getty images/iStockphoto; Page XV: 
Deagreez/Getty Images/iStockphoto; Page V, VIB: Witthaya Prasongsin/iStock / Getty Images Plus; Page VIA: Benchmark Education Company; 
Page VIIA: Photo provided by Linda Hoyt; Page VIIB: Photo provided by Jeff Zweirs; Page VIIC: Photo provided by Wiley Blevins; Page VIID: Photo 
provided by Allison Briceño; Page VIIE: Photo provided by Silvia Dorta-Duque de Reyes; Page VIIF: Photo provided by Michael Priestley; Page VIIG: 
Photo provided by René Boyer; Page VIIH: Photo provided by Peter Afflerbach; Page VII I: Photo provided by Patty McGee; Page VII J: Jimmy Strater/
Crazy Red Eyes Productions; Page VIII: Ariel Skelley/Getty Images; Page IX: dolgachov/Getty Images/iStockphoto; Page X: monkeybusinessimages/
Getty Images/iStockphoto; TABS 1B,3B,5B: Seth Gallmeyer/Shutterstock; AR20,25: North Wind Picture Archives/Alamy Stock Photo; AR22: 
imageBROKER/Alamy Stock Photo; AR23: World History Archive/Alamy Stock Photo; Page 4A,5A,6A: kali9/Getty Images; Page 7A: FatCamera/Getty 
Images; AR56: Photos.com/Getty Images; 
LEXILE® is a trademark of MetaMetrics, Inc., and is registered in the United States and abroad.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC. All rights reserved. Teachers may photocopy the reproducible pages for classroom use.  
No other part of the guide may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, 
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.  
D ig i ta l  re sou rces  a va i l ab l e  on  benchmar kun i ve r se . com.
Printed in _____, ______
ISBN: 978-1-9873-6888-8      A
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_TOC_Authors_Credits.indd   2 10/24/19   11:47 AM
Test-Taking 
as a Genre
Table of Contents
Benchmark Workshop Overview ......................... V
Instructional Design of a Unit & Session ....Foldout
Overview
Introduction .........................................................1 
Strategies to Meet Unit Goals ............................4
Unit Pacing Guide ...............................................6
Test-Taking Sessions ...............................................9
Additional Resources .........................................AR1
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC III
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_TOC_Authors_Credits.indd   3 10/24/19   11:47 AM
Y43339_G5_V2_TOC_Authors_Credits_TEX.indb   4 6/13/19   11:38 AM
 INTRODUCING
TM
Complete, Connected,  
and Completely Flexible 
A series of literacy modules combine  
to provide a complete solution for 
READER’S
literacy instruction. WORKSHOP
PHONICS & 
WORD STUDY  WRITER’S
WORKSHOP WORKSHOP
Designed for: 
TM
•  Today’s Standards
• Responsive Teaching
TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONAL  
• Biliteracy DEVELOPMENT
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC V
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   5 6/13/19   4:47 PM
Dear Educator, 
It is with great excitement that I introduce 
to you a rising star in literacy –  
Benchmark Workshop! In English and Spanish
This star was born out of our commitment to publishing 
quality literacy instructional materials that lift the level of literacy for 
ALL children!
At the heart of our new star are your stars – your students. 
How can we ensure they shine to their full potential and meet today’s 
expectations? 
Utilizing a common-sense instructional approach, our mission is for 
students to become powerful readers and writers in the classroom and 
in the real world. 
Led by an authorship team of literacy experts, Benchmark Workshop 
provides a clear path to meeting today’s grade-level expectations. The 
unique architecture offers efficiency, flexibility, and choice, as well as a 
roadmap for effective instructional decision-making. 
Benchmark Workshop was created for you, a responsive teacher guiding 
your young stars toward a very bright future. The modules, used alone 
or together, provide you with choice, honor your time, and give you 
flexibility. 
We invite you to look inside and explore the possibilities of using 
Benchmark Workshop in your classroom!
   Sincerely,
        Tom Reycraft 
        Founder and CEO
VI © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   6 6/13/19   4:48 PM
Shining Stars of Literacy
The Benchmark Workshop Authors and Consultant Team 
Linda Hoyt, M.A. Jeff Zwiers, Ed.D.
Linda Hoyt has had a rich array of experiences Dr. Jeff Zwiers is a senior researcher at Stanford 
in education, ranging from classroom teaching University. He supports the Understanding Language 
to working as a reading specialist, curriculum Initiative and collaborates with teachers, coaches, 
developer, Title I teacher, staff developer, and Title and school systems to improve academic English 
I District Coordinator. She is the author of twenty- Learner education. He co-directs the Academic 
four professional books, six video programs, and Language Development Network, accelerating 
instructional resources. students’ literacy, language, cognition, and 
conversation skills.
Adria Klein, Ph.D. Wiley Blevins, Ed.M.
Dr. Adria Klein is the director of a center focused on Dr. Wiley Blevins is an early reading specialist who 
early literacy intervention at Saint Mary’s College holds an Ed.M. from Harvard. He taught elementary 
of California and serves as a reviewer for the school in the United States and South America. Dr. 
professional journal The Reading Teacher. A former Blevins is the author of best-selling titles A Fresh 
president of the California Reading Association, Look at Phonics, Phonics from A to Z, and Teaching 
she also served on the International Literacy Phonics & Word Study in the Intermediate Grades.   
Association’s Board of Directors.
Patty McGee, M.Ed. Allison Briceño, Ed.D.
Patty McGee is a prolific writer, consultant, and Dr. Allison Briceño is an Assistant Professor of 
presenter that has served on several committees Elementary Education at San José State University. 
for the New Jersey Department of Education. She Dr. Briceño’s research centers on improving literacy 
presents at national conferences such as ILA, instruction for English Learners and bilingual 
NCTE, ASCD, and Learning Forward, and is author students. She was selected to be an English Learner 
of the best-selling book Feedback That Moves Leadership Fellow with the California Association of 
Writers Forward. Bilingual Educators.
Peter Afflerbach, Ph.D. Silvia Dorta-Duque de Reyes, M.A.
Dr. Peter Afflerbach is Professor of Reading in the Silvia Dorta-Duque de Reyes, 2018 NABE 
Department of Teaching and Learning, Policy and Leadership Award winner, served as a member of the 
Leadership, at the University of Maryland. His Expert Panel for the development of the California 
research includes focus on reading comprehension English Language Development (ELD) Standards. 
strategies and processes, especially related to new A national consultant, her area of expertise is 
literacies, mindfulness, and reading assessment. biliteracy, with a focus on academic language and 
Spanish-to-English cross-linguistic transfer. 
René Boyer, Ed.D. Michael Priestley, M.A.
Dr. René Boyer is a Professor Emeritus of Music Michael Priestley, a professional writer and editor, 
Education at the University of Cincinnati’s College has been directly involved in designing and 
Conservatory of Music. She is known nationally and developing state and national assessments. He 
internationally for her work in multicultural and was formerly the Director of Technical Services at 
urban music education and is a composer, educator, National Evaluation Systems, Inc., and has worked 
and author of best-selling professional books for with educational publishers and state education 
classroom teachers and music specialists.  departments from New York, Florida, Texas, 
California, and Hawaii.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC VII
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   7 6/13/19   4:48 PM
Flexible Print and Digital Resources  
Celebrate Teacher Agency 
and Choice
A flexible roadmap puts the teacher  
in the driver’s seat and provides tools  
to enhance teacher-led instructional 
decisions. 
Build Your Own Workshop
Mix and match modules to meet your classroom’s needs. 
Looking for a reader’s workshop but already have a phonics solution you like?  
Have a word study program but need a writer’s workshop?  
Benchmark Workshop’s modules work together or stand on their own. 
Combine Modules 
for a Comprehensive Solution
READER’S
Used together, the modules connect through WORKSHOP
topics and skills to provide a powerful 
PHONICS & 
cohesive framework for integrated reading, WORD STUDY  WRITER’S
WORKSHOP WORKSHOP
writing, listening, and speaking instruction.  TM
TECHNOLOGY PROFESSIONAL  
DEVELOPMENT
VIII © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   8 6/13/19   4:48 PM
Meet Writing Standards with Unit Goals 
Writing Tasks for Multiple Audiences  
and Purposes
Students develop as writers using self-selected process 
writing as well as writing in response to reading.
•  Writing process and text types: narrative,  
informative, opinion
• Writing in response to reading
• Research writing to build and present knowledge 
• D evelops complexity of syntax, vocabulary, grammar, and 
conventions
Strategies Provide a Path to Unit Goals
In each unit, strategy instruction focuses on students 
meeting learning goals.
 Texto modelo: SEMANA 1
•  Allows for gradual release within writing process Writing Process
lessons and across each unit Immersion
•  Provides students time to acquire, master, and  Generating Ideas
transfer learning Drafting and Revising
Editing and Publishing
Reflection
Transfer
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC IX
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   9 6/13/19   4:48 PM
Responsive Teaching
Supports Effective Instructional Decision-Making 
Assessment That Informs  
Teaching Decisions 
• “Look Fors” in daily mini-lessons 
•  Explicit differentiated instruction 
• R ubrics supporting writing goals  
and qualities of good writing
• S elf-assessments where students hold  
themselves accountable as writers
Strategies to Support  
Teacher Feedback and  
Student Growth
•  Time allotted for specific feedback
•  Teacher model of all strategies
•  Adaptable strategies for  
one-on-one, small group, and  
whole group
Culturally Responsive Practices  
to Foster a Learning Community 
•  Social and emotional mindfulness  
emphasized throughout 
• C onstructive conversations encourage  
multiple perspectives 
• M entor texts reflect students’ cultures  
and experiences
X © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   10 6/13/19   4:48 PM
Biliteracy
Complete Instructional Solutions for Dual Language 
Completely Equitable Resources 
in English and Spanish
• E quivalent resources and instruction 
• C omplete alignment to both English  
and Spanish Language Arts standards 
• 1 00% digital in English and Spanish
Teacher’s Resource System Spanish Teacher’s 
Resource System
Language Development  
for Biliteracy
• L anguage development for English  
and Spanish Learners 
• G rammar instruction unique to  
each language
 Mentor Texts and Source Texts  
in English and Spanish
• S erve as exemplars for students’ writing
•  Writing in response to text and/or  
multiple texts on a topic
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC XI
Y42180_G5_V2_INTRO_PV-XI.indb   11 6/13/19   4:48 PM
Using  Flexible Pacing to  
 Support Varied Literacy Blocks
Grades 3–5 Sample Pacings
TM
0       5      10     15     20     25     30     35    40     45     50     55                     60    65     70     75     80     85     90     95     100   105    110   115  120   125   130   135   140   145   150            
in Your Literacy Block 150-Minute Literacy Block
Virtually every teacher faces the challenge 
of having enough time. The flexibility of 
the Benchmark Workshop resources allows 15 Min. 70 Min.
teachers to customize their daily pacing to meet 
INTERACTIVE  READER’S WORKSHOP
the requirements and challenges they face. READ-ALOUD •  Mini-Lesson (10 min.)
•  Small-Group Reading, Independent Reading,  
The modular Benchmark Workshop resources and Conferring (55 min.)
allow teachers to build a workshop that’s right for • Share and Reflect (5 min.)
their literacy block. There is no single “correct” 
sequence of instruction. The only sequential 
“nonnegotiable” in the workshop is that 
teachers read aloud each week’s Mentor Text 
before they teach the Day 1 Session. 120-Minute Literacy Block
Take advantage of other instructional time in the 
school day. Because the Benchmark Workshop 
vertical progression of knowledge strands 10 Min. 55 Min.
supports content development, teachers may INTERACTIVE READER’S WORKSHOP
integrate literacy and content-area instruction. READ- •  Mini-Lesson (10 min.)
ALOUD
If the literacy block does not provide enough • S mall-Group Reading, Independent Reading,  
and Conferring (40 min.)
time for all the literacy instruction students • Share and Reflect (5 min.)
need, some of that instruction may take place 
in other pockets of time during the day. For 
example, content-focused read-alouds may 
be conducted at the beginning of science or 
social studies time. The concise 10-minute 
micro-workshop session can fit into other small 90-Minute Literacy Block
available pockets.
150- 50 Min. 40 Min.       
Minute Literacy Block
READER’S WORKSHOP WRITER’S WORKSHOP
•  Mini-Lesson (10 min.) •  Mini-Lesson (10 min.)
120-Minute Literacy Block • S mall-Group Reading, Independent Reading,  •  Small-Group Writing, Independent 
and Conferring (35 min.) Writing,  
• Share and Reflect (5 min.) and Conferring (25 min.)
90-Minute Literacy Block • Share and Reflect (5 min.)
XII © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
G5_V2_Pacing Chart_PXII-XIII.indb   12  6/13/19   4:55 PM
Flexible Pacing to  The modular Benchmark Workshop resources allow teachers  
to build a workshop that’s right for their literacy block and take 
Support Varied Literacy Blocks advantage of instructional time in the school day.
Grades 3–5 Sample Pacings
0       5      10     15     20     25     30     35    40     45     50     55                     60    65     70     75     80     85     90     95     100   105    110   115  120   125   130   135   140   145   150            
70 Min. 55 Min. 10 Min.
READER’S WORKSHOP WRITER’S WORKSHOP GRAMMAR 
•  Mini-Lesson (10 min.) •  Mini-Lesson (10 min.) STUDY
• S mall-Group Reading, Independent Reading,  •  Small-Group Writing, Independent Writing,  
and Conferring (55 min.) and Conferring (40 min.)
• Share and Reflect (5 min.) • Share and Reflect (5 min.)
55 Min. 45 Min. 10 Min.
READER’S WORKSHOP WRITER’S WORKSHOP GRAMMAR 
•  Mini-Lesson (10 min.) •  Mini-Lesson (10 min.) STUDY
• S mall-Group Reading, Independent Reading,  •  Small-Group Writing, Independent Writing,  
and Conferring (40 min.) and Conferring (30 min.)
• Share and Reflect (5 min.) • Share and Reflect (5 min.)
40 Min.       
WRITER’S WORKSHOP
•  Mini-Lesson (10 min.)
•  Small-Group Writing, Independent 
Writing,  
and Conferring (25 min.)
• Share and Reflect (5 min.) Other Instructional Time
•  Read-Aloud (10 min.)
•  Grammar Study (10 min.)
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC XIII
 G5_V2_Pacing Chart_PXII-XIII.indb   13 6/13/19   4:55 PM
Dear Fellow Educator,
We offer these Writer’s Workshop volumes to help you create a 
memorable community in your classroom—one where students’ 
strengths as writers will flourish as never before. 
These materials are unlike anything else out there. They are 
comprehensive yet invitational, practical and flexible, goal- and 
strategy-based, filled with examples and exemplars. They are innovative, 
yet true to the original foundations of workshop teaching.
Writer’s Workshop is a well-ordered universe of practices and routines 
that provide opportunities for writing of all sorts. We provide you with 
a day-by-day guide, student-friendly goals, and an armful of tools to 
sustain supportive, responsive instruction. 
Writers Workshop runs on a current of dynamic strategy 
demonstrations, ample writing time, and constructive feedback. When 
these three elements are flowing, students have both the explicit 
instruction they need and the implicit support they crave in order to 
risk-take and grow. 
We offer the pathways, but you walk them with your expertise. Imagine 
the writing world you can create for your students—one where writers 
dig into and make the most of the writing process to create heartfelt, 
authentic pieces that in turn strengthen their writing identity and build 
forever writers.
Teaching writers how to share their voice in order to self-advocate or 
to advocate for others creates a more compassionate world. Let these 
volumes be the guide to help you do just that in your classrooms.
     -Program Authors
XIV © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42180_G5_V2_INAUTHOR LETTER_PXIV-XV.indb   14 6/13/19   4:52 PM
 
Elements of Effective Workshop Instruction
What Students Respond to in a Workshop Setting
1. Space 6. Structure
Writers need the space and time to write. With a predictable, habitual day-to-day routine, 
Writing, at all ages, is a creative endeavor. writers thrive. Consider this a “writer’s 
Creativity blooms with a bit of structure and studio,” with materials at the ready and a 
within a playful environment. similar schedule to follow that almost always 
includes a brief mini-session, independent 
2. Feedback writing time with feedback, and time to reflect.
Writers need timely feedback that recognizes 
strengths and models next steps. Feedback that 7. Partnerships
is corrective in tone intimidates most writers. Writers need other writers. Partnerships as 
Instead, we show writers what is working and an ongoing workshop practice provide writers 
then explain what to do next. with a time to give and receive feedback. The 
peer collaboration develops writing identity, 
3. Choice skill, and trust.
Writers need to make writerly choices. This 
means that we share many strategies with 8. Process
students over time. They choose when and In the workshop setting, we are supporting 
how to use those strategies. writing within a process. Writers take time to 
work with their ideas; plan; draft the best they 
4. Authentic Audience can; go back into their writing to make it even 
better; and know that all of these things cannot 
Writers need to picture who will be done simultaneously.
read their writing. This gives 
writing a greater overall 
purpose, which in turn 9. Reflection
inspires a writer to make Having time to pause and consider what was 
carefully deliberated learned is indispensable. The opportunity for 
choices. reflection synthesizes learning in the short 
term and in the long term.
5. Modeling
Writers need a step- 10. Teachers Who Write
by-step how-to. Teachers who write are better teachers 
When a teacher of writing. This does not mean teachers 
models a strategy must feel they are strong writers but 
and how to use a rather that they are willing writers—
writing technique, courageous enough to share their 
writers are able writing as it moves through the process. 
to envision Modeling this courage helps students be 
possibilities in courageous, too. 
their writing.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC XV
Y42180_G5_V2_INAUTHOR LETTER_PXIV-XV.indb   15 6/13/19   4:52 PM
Instructional Design 
Writer’s Workshop • Overview
Grade 5 Units and Components
Kickoff / Volume 1 Volume 2
Writing as a 
Scientist
Volume 3 Volume 4 Volume 5
Writing Stories and Writing as a 
Personal Narratives Historian
Volume 6 Volume 7
Taking a Stand Making a Topic 
for Our Future Come Alive Through Poetry
XVI © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
G5_V2_COMPONENTS_V2-7.indb   16 6/13/19   4:59 PM
Writer’s Workshop 
Instructional Design of a Unit 
Immersion to Transfer
   G
ENERATING IDEAS
    
     
    D
RAFTING
N
   
    I
MMERSIO
NSF
ER
Explore mentor  Generating and  Drafting
Build excitement texts to determine Developing Ideas
for writing. genre characteristics. • Move from notebook to draft.
• Generate self-selected ideas. • Use specific vocabulary.
• Choose and refine one idea.
• Plan a draft.
Use shared 
writing to try 
out the genre.
Formative Setting Up  
Assessment Experiences  Text-based writing
to what is for Transfer
Set goals  needed
for writing. • Look back at 
previous learning.
Writing Mentor • Reflect on writing.
Texts • Set goals for 
future learning.
Writing Mentor Texts Other self-selected 
✓ writing
✓
Get inspiration from writers’ ✓
techniques and try it! ✓
AMMAR STUDY
Editing, Publishing, and Reflecting Revising
• Polish writing for conventions. • Revise text features and conventions.
• Create and share the finished piece.
• Reflect on writing goals.
Grammar Study
• Explore how language works.
I • Create grammar “how-to’s.”
NG • Transfer learning to workshop.
, AND REFLECTING REVISING
BWWW_TRS_FM_ALLGRADES_Fold.indd   1 8/29/19   10:41 AM
                  
       
                              
    
      
               GR
         TRA
        
                 
EDITING, PU
BLI
SH
Writer’s Workshop 
Instructional Design of a Session  
Mini-Lesson to Reflection Making Time for Meaningful Feedback 
Students have both the explicit instruction they need and the implicit support they The daily session structure provides ample time for effective 
crave in order to take risks and grow. feedback that helps writers grow. 
Focus - Model Guide Practice Independent Writing  Share and Reflect
(Whole-Group Mini-Lesson) (Whole-Group Mini-Lesson) and Feedback (Whole Group)
(Small Group/Independent)
Independent
Focus on  
Learning Goals Students continue to 
work on their drafts 
or revisions.
Partners
Partners practice Bridge to 
the strategy. Transfer Students reflect  
Introduce the Strategy Small Group Conferring and share  
and Lesson Purposes their learning.
Teacher works with Teacher provides 
students who need additional strategy 
extra support or are scaffolding.
ready to move on 
to the next stage.
 Look-Fors
    Teacher observes  
Say Restate writers’ behaviors 
strategy. Model strategy. and determines 
strategy. next steps.
Two-Minute Edit
Ask students to look back over 
their ideas to edit. Use your 
observations during this time to 
inform which conventions you may 
wish to review with students.
BWWW_TRS_FM_ALLGRADES_Fold.indd   2 8/29/19   10:41 AM
Overview:  
Test-Taking  
as a Genre
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_Tabs.indd   1 10/24/19   12:27 PM
Overview
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_Tabs.indd   2 10/24/19   12:27 PM
Overview
Overview
Test-Taking as a Genre
Knowing how to do something is not the Throughout the unit, we will offer strategies for 
same as testing well.  So, in this unit, third doing this work under testing conditions that 
graders will learn how to apply what they require students to work independently and within 
have learned about writing to the formats they will the stated time limits. This requires a different 
encounter when taking standardized tests. Writers approach than the collaborative and flexible ways of 
will need to be able to analyze prompts, plan their working that we have encouraged throughout the 
writing, and draft, revise, and edit under time workshop. 
constraints. They will also need to practice revising 
and editing work that is not their own. Goals of the Unit:
Since not all writing assessments have the same •	 Writers	read	instructions	closely.
format, the first part of the unit offers teachers a 
choice. Student can either work with a prompt that •	 Writers	analyze	any	texts	that	are	provided.
requires no reading and asks them write directly •	 Writers	make	a	plan	to	use	their	time	wisely.
from their own life experience (behind the first 
tab) or work with a prompt that asks students to •	 Writers	use	their	best	spelling,	punctuation,	and	
first analyze source texts before writing a response grammar.
(behind the second tab). Students will be able to •	 Writers	work	quietly	and	independently	under	testing	
apply to these writing tasks what they have already conditions.
learned about personal narrative and opinion 
writing during instructional time as well as what •	 Writers	organize	and	develop	their	writing	using	
they have practiced during transfer activities. familiar	strategies.
Revision and editing in standardized tests asks 
students to improve texts that are not their own, 
familiarizing students with formats that are 
common on standardized assessments. It is a dual 
task, really. Revising existing texts requires students 
to read those texts closely enough to understand 
the purpose, and then make changes to the text 
that make it more logical, more thorough, or more 
precise.  
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 1
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   1 10/25/19   2:38 PM
Overview
Flow of the Unit
This unit unfolds in phases and begins with a 
choice of writing task types. Then all students will 
get practice revising and editing supplied texts. 
Finally students will have an opportunity to put it 
all together during a practice test. Depending on 
the type of assessments students will face, teachers 
may choose the tasks under option A or option B to 
practice. 
Writing Tasks, Option A
Writers will begin with analysis of a prompt and 
checklist for explanatory writing on a topic drawn 
from life experience. The class will work together to 
create a writing plan using a graphic organizer. Then 
students will get another prompt and will plan out 
on their own and then write their piece. Teachers 
will walk around to supply support as needed with 
small groups or conferences. Then teachers will 
model how students can review their own work. 
Once students have been introduced to that process, 
they get the chance to practice planning, writing, 
and reviewing a second explanatory essay also based 
on their life experience.
Writing Tasks, Option B
Writers will begin learning how to analyze a prompt 
and source texts from which to extract information 
before working as a class to create a plan for writing 
using a graphic organizer. Then students will get 
another prompt and will plan out on their own and 
then write their piece. Teachers will walk around 
to supply support as needed with small groups or 
conferences. Then teachers will model how students 
can review their own work. Once students have 
been led through that process, they get the chance 
to analyze a prompt and sources texts before they 
plan, write, and review a new narrative based on the 
information in the texts.
2 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   2 10/25/19   2:38 PM
Overview
Week 2: Revising and Editing Week 2: Practice Test
During this part of the unit, students will practice Students will get the chance to put all they have 
revising and editing. They will review grammar practiced together in a test. Teachers can choose 
and language conventions they have explored a test that matches what students have practiced 
during Grammar Study mini-lessons, and practice during option A or option B. By the end of the 
applying their knowledge in tasks that prepare unit, students should feel comfortable making 
them for assessments. They begin with a revision a writing plan for the types of tasks they will 
of one of the writing tasks they completed. They encounter on their assessment. They should have 
will begin the notes for revision they created during practice working in a timed situation and have 
week 1 and teachers will remind them to use their some strategies for working within time constraints. 
checklists. Then students will begin to work with Finally, they should have practice with both revising 
testing formats where they are asked to revise and and editing their own work as well as passages that 
edit passages that are provided to them and will are provided for them. 
learn how to attack these tasks strategically. They 
will look at passages at an organization level, at a 
sentence level, and at a word level to improve sense 
and clarity as well as eliminating errors. 
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 3
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   3 10/25/19   2:38 PM
Overview
Strategies to Meet Unit Goals
Writers generate and develop ideas for their writing pieces.
Goal:  Goal:  Goal:  
Writers read instructions Writers analyze any texts Writers make a plan to 
closely. that are provided. use their time wisely.
Strategies: Strategies: Strategies:
✓✓Breaking the prompt down into ✓✓Citing text-based evidence ✓✓Answering revision questions 
steps (pp. 26, 46) (p. 36 ) (p. 54)
✓✓Rereading the prompt (pp. 27, ✓✓Putting ideas into your own ✓✓Eliminating wrong answers 
38) words (p. 37) (p. 57)
✓✓Reading the prompt before ✓✓Using graphic organizers to ✓✓Replacing vague 
reading the passage (p. 34) collect story details (p. 44) descriptions (p. 60)
✓✓ Identifying an off-topic ✓✓Choosing the correct way 
sentence (p. 56) to write a sentence on an 
assessment (p. 18)
✓✓Using a Checklist to Revise 
(pp. 20, 40)
44 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   4 10/25/19   2:38 PM
Overview
Goal:  Goal:  Writers organize and 
Writers use their best Writers work quietly and develop their writing using 
spelling, punctuation, independently under familiar strategies.
and grammar. testing conditions. 
Strategies:
Strategies: Strategies: ✓✓Using graphic organizers to plan 
(pp. 12, 32)
✓✓Editing section-by-section ✓✓Choosing comparatives or 
(p. 50) superlatives (p. 64) ✓✓Developing a central idea (p. 
14)
✓✓Editing sentences on an ✓✓Using pronouns correctly (p. 
assessment (p. 58) 65) ✓✓Supporting what you say with 
examples (p. 16)
✓✓Finding your own mistakes ✓✓Eliminating wrong answers (p. 
(p. 52) 57) ✓✓Choosing a central idea (p. 17)
✓✓Checking punctuation ✓✓Replacing vague descriptions ✓✓Supporting information (p. 22)
(p. 61) (p. 60) ✓✓Choosing details and examples 
✓✓Choosing the correct way with care (p. 24)
to write a sentence on an ✓✓Having a logical organization 
assessment (p. 62) (p. 25) 
✓✓Making sure your story has a 
point (p. 49)
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 5
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   5 10/25/19   2:38 PM
Overview
Unit Pacing Guide
DAY 1 DAY 2  DAY 3 DAY 4 DAY 5
Analyzing a Prompt and Planning Writing on the Spot: Opinion Essay Reviewing and Revising Your Writing on the Spot: Informative Reviewing and Revising Your 
The class will analyze a prompt use a checklist Students will choose a topic. Students will use a Opinion Essay Essay Informative Essay
for opinion essay. Together, the class will create a graphic organizer to plan and draft an opinion Students will review their opinion essays Students will use a graphic organizer to Students will review their informative 
Week 1, Option A: shared writing plan. essay. using their checklists and make a plan plan and draft an informative essay. essays using the checklist and make a 
Writing Tasks for revision. plan for revision.
Analyzing a Prompt and Two Articles Writing on the Spot: Informative Essay Reviewing and Revising Your Analyzing a Narrative and a Writing on the Spot: Narrative   
Students analyze source texts and a writing Students use a graphic organizer to collect Informative Essay Prompt Students reread the prompt and write a 
prompt. Students make a plan for writing an evidence for an informative essay. Students put Student revise their informative essays Together, students will analyze source narrative using what they learned from 
Week 1, Option B: informative essay using information from the information in their own words. using a revision checklist.  texts and a narrative writing prompt. source texts. 
Writing Tasks source texts. Students will use a graphic organizer to 
make a shared writing plan to draft their 
narratives 
Revising and Editing Your Essay Revising for Structure Editing for Clarity Editing to Polish Taking a Practice Test 
Students choose from multiple strategies to revise Students revise their informative essays focusing Students focus on editing their Students review their essays word by In a testing setting, students write an 
Week 2: their informative essays. on structure, including sentence order. informative writing for accurate word to spot easily confused words and essay in response to a prompt and revise 
Revising and 
Editing Tasks & grammar, punctuation, and spelling, and other spelling errors. and edit paragraphs in a testing setting.
Practice Test fixing or replacing vague descriptions.
66 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   6 10/29/19   1:58 PM
Overview
DAY 1 DAY 2  DAY 3 DAY 4 DAY 5
Analyzing a Prompt and Planning Writing on the Spot: Opinion Essay Reviewing and Revising Your Writing on the Spot: Informative Reviewing and Revising Your 
The class will analyze a prompt use a checklist Students will choose a topic. Students will use a Opinion Essay Essay Informative Essay
for opinion essay. Together, the class will create a graphic organizer to plan and draft an opinion Students will review their opinion essays Students will use a graphic organizer to Students will review their informative 
Week 1, Option A: shared writing plan. essay. using their checklists and make a plan plan and draft an informative essay. essays using the checklist and make a 
Writing Tasks for revision. plan for revision.
Analyzing a Prompt and Two Articles Writing on the Spot: Informative Essay Reviewing and Revising Your Analyzing a Narrative and a Writing on the Spot: Narrative   
Students analyze source texts and a writing Students use a graphic organizer to collect Informative Essay Prompt Students reread the prompt and write a 
prompt. Students make a plan for writing an evidence for an informative essay. Students put Student revise their informative essays Together, students will analyze source narrative using what they learned from 
Week 1, Option B: informative essay using information from the information in their own words. using a revision checklist.  texts and a narrative writing prompt. source texts. 
Writing Tasks source texts. Students will use a graphic organizer to 
make a shared writing plan to draft their 
narratives 
Revising and Editing Your Essay Revising for Structure Editing for Clarity Editing to Polish Taking a Practice Test 
Students choose from multiple strategies to revise Students revise their informative essays focusing Students focus on editing their Students review their essays word by In a testing setting, students write an 
Week 2: their informative essays. on structure, including sentence order. informative writing for accurate word to spot easily confused words and essay in response to a prompt and revise 
Revising and 
Editing Tasks & grammar, punctuation, and spelling, and other spelling errors. and edit paragraphs in a testing setting.
Practice Test fixing or replacing vague descriptions.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 7
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1_Overview.indd   7 10/29/19   1:58 PM
Y42180_G5_V2_OVERVIEW_P1-7.indb   8 6/13/19   12:20 PM
Test-Taking 
Sessions
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_Tabs.indd   3 10/24/19   12:27 PM
Weeks 1-2: 
 Test-Taking Sessions
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_Tabs.indd   4 10/24/19   12:27 PM
Weeks 1-2: 
 Test-Taking Sessions
Test-Taking Sessions
Table of Contents
Week 1 Option A :  Writing to a Prompt Session 3:  
Session 1:  Reviewing and Revising Your 
Analyzing a Prompt and Planning  ..........10 Informative Essay ......................................38
Session 2:  Session 4:
Writing on the Spot  ..................................14 Analyzing a Prompt and Narrative ..........42
Session 3: Session 5: 
Reviewing and Revising Your Opinion Writing on the Spot ...................................46
Essay...........................................................18
Week 2:  Revising and Editing & 
Session 4:                  Practice Test
Writing on the Spot ...................................22
Session 6: 
Session 5:  Revising and Editing Your Essay ..............50
Reviewing and Revising Your Informative 
Session 7: 
Essay...........................................................26
Revising for Structure ...............................54
Week 1 Option B:  Writing to a Prompt Session 8:
                                   and Source Texts Editing for Clarity ......................................58
Session 1:  Session 9: 
Analyzing a Prompt and Editing to Polish .........................................62
Two Articles ...............................................30 Session 10:
Session 2: Taking a Practice Test ...............................66
Writing on the Spot ...................................34
XXXIII © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 9
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_TOC_Weeks_1_2.indd   33 10/24/19   12:46 PM
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 1
Analyzing a Prompt and Planning
State the Focus and Purpose (2–3 MIN.)
Sometimes you may be asked to write an essay during a 
test. Today, we will look at a prompt together and analyze 
what it is asking us to do. Then we will work together to 
make a plan for how to start writing. This will help you 
when you approach another prompt on your own tomorrow.
Learning Goals
WE WILL STUDY:
✓ What information is contained in a prompt
✓ How graphic organizers can help us plan our 
writing
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
Analyze a Prompt (10 MIN.)  EL
Offer some guiding questions to help students 
analyze this model prompt. Invite them to work in 
pairs to discuss answers.
Guiding Questions for Analyzing a Prompt Session 1 Writing on the Spot Prompt
1. What is the subject of this essay?
2. What is an example of a central idea?
3. How can you organize your essay?
4. Which verb helps you know exactly what you are 
supposed to do?
5. What can you use to support a central idea?
6. What can you do during planning?
7. What can you do during revising and editing?
Once students have had the opportunity to 
analyze the prompt, invite pairs to share what they 
discovered.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Writing on the Spot prompt, p. AR3
• Graphic Organizer, p. AR7
• Chart paper or interactive whiteboard
10 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S1.indd   10 10/30/19   12:56 PM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 1
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect
Pose the following questions for reflection:
What can you learn by looking closely at a prompt?
Central 
idea is that How will this help you plan your own essay?
you are an Encourage students to jot down thoughts in their 
Subject 
adventurous notebooks.
of the 
essay person.
This tells Put your EL Supporting English Language 
Development
you what to reasons Provide Visual Support
do. Notice in order.
Check understanding of the key words (adventurous, 
the verb! risk-takers, prefer, participate, familiar, cautious, 
approach) in the prompt. Then, make sure students 
First three Details support understand the writing task by discussing the verb 
bullets can Last two bullets the central idea statement. For example: The word explain tells the kind 
be part of can be addressed with examples of information you will include. When you explain your 
thoughts, what do you write? How do you support those 
planning. during drafting and from your life.
reasons?
revising/editing. 
Provide visual examples where applicable to help 
students build necessary vocabulary for their response. 
Annotated Prompt Example Use the Guiding Questions as you do this.
FESS
RO IO
PD
EL T
O FESS
PMEN RO IO
PD
FES E
S
RO IO LO S
PMENT
ROFES IO
Patty McGee PD PD
E E
L T OFESS L T ES
R IO O S
Use Option A during weO N
ek one toP sDupport PMEN ROF IO
PME
PD
students who will have to write esELsayNsT  from E
O ESS L T
PME ROF IO OPMEN
their own life experience during assessmenPtsD. If 
students are more likely to face assessmentELs thaTO t SI
PMEN ROFES O
require them to incorporate information from PD
EL T
OPMEN
articles, then use Option B during week one.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 11
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S1.indd   11 10/30/19   12:56 PM
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Session 1
L 
NA
AL 
DEV N
L DE
V
NA
L 
DEV N
A
DEV
NAL 
L 
DEV N
A
V
L DE
NA
AL 
DEV N
DEV
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 1
Analyzing a Prompt and Planning
Introduce the Strategy (5–7 MIN.)
Now that we’ve analyzed a prompt, it’s time to start 
planning. I’ve got a graphic organizer that I plan to use. You 
may want to create your own. Remember, you are planning 
to explain your central idea — the qualities that a good 
friend possesses and why.
Sometimes, before you answer a question, you might have 
to think a little about it. Maybe, you’ve never considered 
what sort of personality you have, so we can start there.
Strategy: Using Graphic Organizers to 
Plan
1. Think about the central idea. Ask 
yourself: “How can I use a graphic 
organizer to list the possibilities?”
2. List the activities that make you 
cautious, adventurous, or somewhere 
in the middle.
3. Look at the activities you listed, and 
decide what kind of personality you 
have.
Model the Strategy (5–7 Planning Graphic Organizer
MIN.)
Share the graphic organizer provided or create 
your own. Then model the strategy for how to start 
planning the essay.
1. First, I think about the central idea, which is whether I’m 
an adventurous or cautious person. It helps me to list the 
possibilities so I can make a decision.
2. I list some activities I participate in —from cautious 
to adventurous. For example, I love tall, looping roller 
coasters, which I think is very adventurous. But when I 
ride my bike, I like to ride on the sidewalk instead of in 
traffic, which is cautious. 
3. Finally, I review the activities I listed and decide that I am 
a pretty adventurous person.
12 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S1.indd   12 10/30/19   12:56 PM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 1
TRANSFER
Use the Strategy (5 min.)  EL
Invite students to work with a partner or small 
group to fill in the graphic organizer with their own 
activities.
Softball Talk about the different activities students listed and 
Hiking where they placed them on the list from the most 
adventurous to the most cautious.
Share and Reflect (5 min.)
Roller coasters Ask students to consider this question:
Ride my bike on White water How can you use a graphic organizer to plan in the future?
the sidewalk rafting
Students may discuss their answers with a partner 
Stay away from 
dogs I don’t know and/or jot down notes about what they learned 
today. Invite a few students to discuss their ideas 
with the rest of the class.
Competitive ice 
skating
Performed in Supporting English Language 
Make new talent show EL Development
friends
Try new foods Build Thinking and Language
Display the planning graphic organizer. Explain that 
adventurous and cautious are antonyms or opposites. 
Then, check their understanding of the strategy of 
placing events on a continuum using the idea of “most 
to least.”  For example: The most adventurous activity I 
do is riding roller coasters. But the least adventurous, 
or most cautious, thing I do is riding my bike on the 
Planning Graphic Organizer Filled-in Example sidewalk. These activities will go on opposite ends of 
the line. All the other activities will fall somewhere in 
the middle, depending on how adventurous or cautious 
they are.
Elicit an explanation of how the graphic organizer 
relates to the prompt. 
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 13
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S1.indd   13 10/30/19   12:56 PM
Session 1
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 2
Writing on the Spot
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1-2 MIN.)
Today, you will get a chance to practice writing an opinion Let me show you a strategy you can use to choose a central 
essay. This type of writing is an opportunity to state your idea to develop when completing an assessment test.  EL
ideas on a subject and then explain your way of thinking. 
The goal for today’s lesson is to analyze a prompt, plan 
out your thinking, and then do your best to write your Strategy: Developing a Central Idea
explanation — all within a single writing session. One 1.	 Find	two	or	three	important	words	in	
important part of this process is to develop a central idea 
throughout the piece. the	prompt	that	describe	what	the	
task	requires	you	to	do.
Today’s exercise gives you practice for the kind of tasks that 
you will find in written assessments. By practicing this now, 2.	Jot	down	your	ideas	that	can	tell	the	
you’ll feel a lot more confident when the time comes to do reader	about	these	important	words.
it for real. 3.	Choose	one	idea	that	you	know	the	
most	about.
Learning Goals 4.	Jot	down	two	or	three	details	about	
We Will Study: this	central	idea.
✓ How to write an opinion essay on the spot
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies. 
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under 
testing conditions.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Student Writing Prompt: Session 2, p. AR4
• Graphic Organizer, p. AR9 Session	2	Student	Writing	Prompt
14 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S2.indd   14 10/30/19   1:01 PM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 2
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Distribute the Writing on the Spot prompt for today’s Repeat the strategy for students, and invite them to 
session. Read it aloud with students and clarify any now work with a partner to try it out.  EL
questions they have. Show students how you used 
the strategy to develop a central idea. For example:
1. First, I find three or four important words in the prompt. EL Supporting English Language 
These words will tell me what the task requires me to do. Development
For example, I see “traits,” “good friend,”  “reasons,” and Build Thinking and Language
“explain.” I know I‘m supposed to write an explanation Ensure students understand the task by eliciting the kinds 
about what I think it means to be a good friend. of information they should include when asked to explain 
something. 
2. Next, I jot down ideas I have that tell more about 
these important words. I think important traits include: Then, check for understanding of the task by having them 
share stories about their friends and by asking them 
kindness, being a good listener, helping. questions about friendship, such as the following: 
3. Then, I choose one idea I feel strongly about. I think it’s How does your best friend make you feel? 
really important for a friend to be a good listener. Have you ever felt like you needed to talk to a friend? 
Why? 
4. Finally, I jot down details that tell about this central idea. What does the word friend mean? 
When I’m upset about something or need help, I count What is your best friend like? 
on my friends to really listen to me and be supportive or What do you like the most about your friends?
helpful. Display the sentence frames for students to jot down 
ideas:
My best friends are ___.
I choose friends that are ___.
___ is a trait I like in friends.
___ is an important trait because ___.
Graphic Organizer
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 15
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S2.indd   15 10/29/19   12:48 PM
Session 2
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 2
Writing on the Spot
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3-4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Invite students to try the strategy orally in Invite students to respond to the “Writing on the 
partnerships. Spot” prompt in their Writer’s Notebooks. Encourage 
them to use all that they have learned about 
Now it’s your turn. Briefly discuss with your partner how you supporting their ideas with reasons and examples. 
plan to use the strategy to complete today’s Writing on the Use the rubric to help you gather information for 
Spot exercise. You will have the chance to actually come up making instructional choices throughout the volume. 
with and develop a central idea in Independent Writing.
Monitor student progress as you simulate a test-
Allow some time for writers to think this through taking environment. Notice what students are doing 
first before sharing with partners. Monitor and and who may benefit from additional support. 
observe students as they work collaboratively. Check Confer with individuals as needed while the rest of 
in with writers who seem confused and use the the class works quietly on their own.
modeling example to provide support as needed.
Conferring
If a student could use some support with choosing a 
L K FORS central idea, a strategy you might show that writer is:
✓ Oral rehearsal with the strategy
✓ Active listening
✓ Identification of important words in the Strategy: Supporting What You Say 
writing prompt With Examples
✓ Discussion of how to use those words to 
develop a central idea 1. Think about examples from your own 
life that support your thinking.
Make notes about writers who may need additional support 
generating ideas. Focus on developing this during small- 2. Think of examples you know from other 
group or conferring time.
people’s lives.
Bridge to Transfer 3. Talk about how these examples either 
changed your thinking or made you 
Remind students of what the strategy is, how to do even more convinced of your idea.
it, and when the writer might use this strategy again. 
Remember, this strategy is helpful when you are writing 
from your own experience without additional resources.
16 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S2.indd   16 10/29/19   10:59 AM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 2
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Conferring Gather students in small groups, and invite them to 
reflect on the following questions:
If a student would benefit from support for 
elaboration in their writing, a strategy you might How did it feel to write an opinion essay in one session?
show that writer is:
How did using the strategy help you develop a central idea?
Then invite a few students to share their thoughts 
Strategy: Choosing a Central Idea with the class. 
1.	 Test	your	central	idea	to	be	sure	it’s	
something	you	are	comfortable	writing	
about. EL Supporting English Language 
Development
2.	Ask	yourself:	 Build Thinking and Language
•	Do	I	have	direct	experience	with	this	 To help students develop necessary vocabulary and 
idea? background knowledge, gather picture books and images 
•	Do	I	feel	strongly	about	this	idea? depicting friends having fun, being helpful, being kind, 
listening, etc. Give students time to review the materials 
3.	If	you	answered	“no”	to	both	 to help foster and build ideas. Once completed, elicit 
questions,	choose	another	central	idea	 ideas and co-construct a word bank for student use. For 
FESS
to	write	about. RO IO example: helpful, kind, honest, trustworthy, funny, fun, 
PD outgoing, adventurous, comforting, accepting, 
EL T
O FESS
PMEN RO IO
P Allow students to get vocabulary help from students who 
D
E share their home language. 
FESS L T
RO IO O FESS
PMEN RO IO
Patty McGee PD PD Depending on experience, students may not have 
EL T FES E
O S L T OFESSIO
he conferring straMteE
N
gies prR
O I
P O O friendships to draw on. Help them identify the qualities 
T PoDvided PMEN R
PD in classmates and family members that they appreciate.  
here are only suggestions. EYL ou Tmay wish E
O L T
PMEN FESS
RO IO OPMEN Explain as needed. 
to share a different strategy (see pagPeD 
AR68) or create one of your own to sEhLOare FESSI
PMENT
RO O
with your students. PD
EL T
OPMEN
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 17
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S2.indd   17 10/28/19   12:15 PM
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Session 2
AL N
DEV N
AL 
AL D
EV
N
L 
DEV N
A
DEV
NAL 
L 
DEV N
A
L DE
V
NA
L 
DEV N
A
DEV
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 3
Reviewing and Revising Your Opinion Essay
State the Focus and Purpose (1–2 MIN.)
Today, you’ll have a chance to review the opinion essay you 
wrote on the spot. Take some time, and see how you might The Most Important Qualities in a Friend  
what you have learned to revise it. You can go back to the 
checklist to see if you met all the requirements. We will do Friends are an important part of life. People will look for 
this in just one session, so you’ll want to concentrate on the different qualities in a friend.   
most important revisions and save time for more editing. A friend should be a good listener. This is because we often 
go to a friend with our worries or when we run into trouble. 
Sometimes you need someone to talk a problem over with, and 
Learning Goals to do this, the friend needs to listen. Having someone listen to 
you is important.  
We Will Study:
Not only should a friend be a good listener, but you need to 
✓ Ways to improve opinion essays. be able to trust him or her. If you are going to a friend with a 
WE WILL WORK ON: problem, you want to feel confident that your friend won’t tell 
THE GOALS other people. Sometimes we share things with a friend that 
we don’t want other people to know. When a friend tells me 
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
something personal, I keep it to myself. This is because I know 
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely. my friend trusts me to not repeat what she shares with me with 
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, other people. If this happens, then trust is lost, and it’s very hard 
and grammar. to be friends with someone after that.  
✓ Writers work quietly and independently Lastly, it’s important that a friend be supportive. We all make 
under testing conditions. mistakes in life, and when you are in trouble or do something 
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing wrong, you need a friend to turn to. A friend is someone 
using familiar strategies. who will still be your friend even when you mess up. It’s also 
important to support a friend during good times, too. A friend 
should be happy for you and celebrate your successes. 
Review Your Essay Using a Checklist  Friends come in all shapes and sizes, and we will meet many 
(10–15 friends throughout life. A friend may have many qualities, but 
MIN.)  EL being a good listener, trustworthy, and supportive are the most 
This is your chance to use all that you have learned about important qualities. These are the qualities I value in a friend. 
writing in this unit to improve it in a short period of time. 
The checklist can be your guide! To help you to decide Writing on the Spot Opinion Essay Example 
what to do next, try these steps:
•  Read over your Opinion Writing Checklist. Is there 
anything you need to work on?
•  Make some notes on your copy of the checklist to show 
what you did well or what could be improved.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Writing on the Spot draft from Session 2
• Self-stick notes
• Opinion Writing Checklist, p. AR8
18 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y432185_W1S1_S5_NAT.indb   18 10/24/19   1:04 PM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 3
TRANSFER
Review and Reflect (5 MIN.)
Invite students to jot ideas on self-stick notes about 
revisions based on their review of the essay against 
the checklist.
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Build Thinking and Language
Check students’ grasp of the checklist to help them get 
a clear understanding of what they are looking for in 
their writing. Then, use a think-aloud as you model the 
activity, using the information in the checklist to ask 
yourself the following questions as you look at your 
work: 
Where is my main idea?
Where are my reasons and details?  
Do I have enough details to support this idea? 
Are the words I use specific and clear? Can I clearly see 
what I am describing?
Opinion Essay Checklist
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 19
Y432185_W1S1_S5_NAT.indb   19 10/24/19   1:04 PM
Session 3
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 3
Reviewing and Revising Your Opinion Essay
Introduce and Model the Strategy (5–6 MIN.)
Today, students will practice how they can use the 
different strategies that they learned so far to revise 
their essay quickly. Begin by reminding them to be 
sure they state their central idea in the opening and 
closing of the essay, and remind them to be sure to 
use transitions to help readers follow their ideas. 
Before students review and revise their essays, show 
them a model of how you might use the checklist to 
find ways of improving your piece.
Now you can plan your revision based on the checklist and 
make the changes. We want to limit our revisions to what 
the checklist asks for since that is how the essay will be 
scored. Once you have a chance to make your revisions, 
remember to leave some time for editing the final version.
Strategy: Using a Checklist to Revise
1. Look at the notes you put on your 
checklist.
2. Make notes on your essay about what 
you could quickly change.
3. Make those changes.
4. Remember to edit your final version.
Annotated Opinion Essay Checklist
Use the Strategy (20 MIN.)  EL
Remind students that when they are in a testing I don’t have enough I didn’t state it in 
situation, they won’t have time to completely rewrite support for my thinking. my first paragraph.
their pieces, so have them use this time to make 
the revisions that would address the items on the 
checklist. Encourage students to edit their final 
version.
20 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_W1S1_S5_TEX.indb   20 10/24/19   1:01 PM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 3
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect (5 MIN.)
How do you feel about your revised essay? What have you 
The Most Important Qualities in a Friend  learned that you can apply the next time you are writing 
an essay during a test?
Friends are an important part of life. People will look for 
different qualities in a friend.   
A friend should be a good listener. This is because we often 
go to a friend with our worries or when we run into trouble. EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Sometimes, you need someone to talk a problem over with, and 
to do this, the friend needs to listen. Having someone listen to Build Thinking and Language
you is important.  
Review student writing, and co-create a word bank of 
Not only should a friend be a good listener, but you need to transition words (to begin with, additionally, furthermore, 
be able to trust him or her. If you are going to a friend with a 
problem, you want to feel confident that your friend won’t tell finally, in conclusion, for example) for their chosen 
other people. Sometimes we share things with a friend that writing formats. Display the words.
we don’t want other people to know. When a friend tells me As students check their writing against the checklist, 
something personal, I keep it to myself. This is because I know circulate and offer explicit support. For example: Let’s 
my friend trusts me to not repeat what she shares with me with focus on details and examples. Can you show me an 
other people. If this happens, then trust is lost, and it’s very hard example from your own life in your writing? Where 
to be friends with someone after that.  
might you add another example? 
Lastly, it’s important that a friend be supportive. We all make 
mistakes in life, and when you are in trouble or do something Then, guide students in the addition of one or two 
wrong, you need a friend to turn to. A friend is someone transition words from the bank. For example: Let’s add a 
who will still be your friend even when you mess up. It’s also transition word here to help connect the ideas. How are 
important to support a friend during good times, too. A friend these two sentences connected to each other? What 
should be happy for you and celebrate your successes. word from the bank would help make this connection?
Friends come in all shapes and sizes, and we will meet many Explain the meaning of transition words as needed.
friends throughout life. A friend may have many qualities, but 
being a good listener, trustworthy, and supportive are the most Throughout the activity, allow students to seek help 
important qualities. These are the qualities I value in a friend. from students who share their home language. 
Opinion Essay with Revision Notes Example 
Add the central 
idea: To be a 
friend, you should Add example and details: My 
be a good listener, dad is a good listener. He is 
trustworthy, and quiet as I talk; then, he asks 
supportive. questions to help me solve 
my problem. His questions 
tell me he’s listening to me.
Add example from my life: When 
I won the spelling bee, my friend 
Katie was happy for me even 
though she was in the spelling 
bee, too, and didn’t win. 
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 21
Y43337_W1S1_S5_TEX.indb   21 10/24/19   1:01 PM
Session 3
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 4
Writing on the Spot
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1-2 MIN.)
Today, you will get a chance to write an informative essay. Let me show you a strategy you can use to add clear 
The goal for today is to analyze a prompt, plan out your descriptions and details to your essay when completing a 
thinking, and then do your best to write your informative writing assessment.  EL
essay — all within a single writing session. One important 
part of informative writing is providing clear descriptions or 
examples so the information is clear to your reader. Strategy: Supporting Information
Today’s task gives you practice for the kind of writing tasks 1. Think about your central idea.
that are on actual tests. By practicing this now, you’ll feel a 2. Ask yourself: 
lot more confident when the time comes to do it for real. • What is the most important 
information for my reader?
• What details make that information 
Learning Goals clear?
We Will Study: • What examples make that 
✓ How to write an informative essay on the 
spot information clear?
WE WILL WORK ON: 3. Include these details and examples in 
THE GOALS
✓ Writers read instructions closely. your essay.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently 
under testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Student Writing Prompt, p. AR5
• Informative Writing Checklist, p. AR34 Session 4 Writing on the Spot Prompt
22 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S4.indd   22 10/29/19   10:53 AM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 4
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Distribute the Writing on the Spot prompt for today’s Repeat the strategy for students, and invite them to 
session. Read the prompt aloud with students, and now work with a partner to try it out.  EL
clarify any questions they might have. Demonstrate 
how you used the strategy to include supporting 
information for your central idea. For example: EL Supporting English Language 
Development
1. First, I think about my central idea, the information I want 
to share with my reader. For example, I might want to Build Thinking and Language
explain that I think that always trying to improve helps Check understanding of the key words (success, fame, 
people be successful. respect, achievement, self-worth, measure). Ensure 
students understand the task by eliciting the kinds of 
2. Next, I consider what sort of information I can share to information they should include when asked to explain 
support this idea. I’ll include details about the time I had something.  
a part in a play. I was nervous about learning my lines, 
so I asked my friends for help practicing. After two weeks Then, help generate ideas by having them share stories 
about people who are successful, then asking students 
of hard work, I knew my lines perfectly! I’ll use examples questions about what makes them successful. 
from my own life that show how by trying to improve, we 
can be successful. What did he/she succeed at? 
What has he/she accomplished? 
3. Finally, I add this information to my informative essay so Is he/she famous? 
that my central idea is clear. Do people respect him/her?
Note: If necessary, place students in home language 
groups and allow them to share their ideas in their home 
language.
Informative Essay Checklist
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 23
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S4.indd   23 10/29/19   10:53 AM
Session 4
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 4
Writing on the Spot
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3-4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Invite students to try the strategy orally in Invite students to complete the “Writing on the Spot” 
partnerships. task in their Writer’s Notebooks.  
Now it’s your turn. Take a few minutes to discuss with your Use the Informative Writing Rubric to help you 
partner how you plan to use the strategy to complete today’s gather information for making instructional choices 
Writing on the Spot task. You will have the chance to write throughout the unit. 
an informative essay and add details and examples in Monitor student progress as you simulate a test-
Independent Writing. taking environment. Notice what they are doing and 
Allow some time for writers to think this through who may benefit from additional support. Confer 
first before sharing with partners. Monitor and with individual students as needed.
observe students as they work collaboratively. Check 
in with writers who seem confused and use the Conferring
modeling example to provide support as needed. If a student includes too many details and examples  
or details and examples that don’t support their 
central idea, a strategy you might show that writer is:
L K FORS
✓ Oral rehearsal with the strategy Strategy:  Choosing Details and 
✓ Active listening Examples with Care 
✓ Identification of details and examples
✓ Discussion of how to use those details and 1. Focus on a paragraph or section of your 
examples to add to the essay essay.
Make notes about writers who may need additional support 2. Think about the point that you are 
generating ideas. Focus on developing this during small-
group or conferring time. making.
3. Make a list of details and examples to 
Bridge to Transfer support your point.
Remind students of what the strategy is, how to do 4. Choose the detail or example that best 
it, and when the writer might use this strategy again. supports your central point.
This strategy is helpful whenever you are deciding what 
supporting details you should include when you write 
informative essays.
24 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S4.indd   24 10/29/19   10:52 AM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 4
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Conferring Gather students in small groups and invite them to 
If a student would benefit from support with reflect on the following questions:
organization, a strategy you might show that writer is: How did it feel to write an informational essay in one 
session?
Strategy:  Having a Logical How did adding details help support your central idea?
Organization Then invite a few students to share their thoughts 
1. List the main points you’re making in with the class. 
your essay.
2. Think about how those ideas are EL Supporting English Language 
connected and which transition words Development
show those connections, such as in Build Thinking and Language
addition, because of, as a result, Have students work with multiple partners to make their 
and although. ideas stronger and clearer. 
3. Number your ideas to show the best Step 1: Have partners explain their ideas for writing and 
offer each other feedback.
logical order. Step 2: Give students time to reflect on the feedback 
4. Revise your essay to present your and think about how they can make their ideas stronger 
ideas in that order, using the and clearer.
transition words. Step 3: Assign new partners, and repeat the activity.
Two-Minute Edit
Ask students to look back over their ideas to edit. Use 
this time to observe how well students are using the 
conventions.
Grammar Study
As you are planning your grammar study, refer to the 
lessons and learning experiences in the Grammar Study 
Handbook. Adjust your grammar plans in response to what 
you observe.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 25
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S4.indd   25 10/29/19   10:52 AM
Session 4
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 5
Reviewing and Revising Your Informative Essay 
State the Focus and Purpose (1–2 MIN.)
Today, you’ll have a chance to review the informative 
essay you wrote on the spot. Take some time and see how 
you might use all that you have learned to rework and What Is the Best Measure of Success? 
revise it. You can go back to the checklist to see if you 
When reaching toward a goal, students should understand 
need to make any other changes. We will do this in just that success does not come right away. It is earned through 
one session, so you’ll want to concentrate on the most hard work and dedication. The best way to measure success 
important revisions and save time for more editing. should be improvement and hard work. Even when things 
become challenging or there are rough patches, being 
successful means not giving up on a goal.  
Learning Goals For example, for a student who struggles in science class 
We Will Study: becoming a stronger student means doing homework on time, 
✓ Ways to improve informative essays. studying before tests, and asking for help when needed. All of 
these things take time and persistence for students to improve 
WE WILL WORK ON: their science class grades. A student might get a better grade 
THE GOALS: on one assignment and still struggle with other aspects of the 
✓ Writers read instructions closely. class. However, a successful student will learn how to tackle 
different obstacles as they come. This takes dedication which 
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely. leads to success.  
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.    This example shows how success is measured through 
consistently trying to do your best. Doing well in school and 
✓ Writers work quietly and independently other goals all require consistency. Without consistency, it is 
under testing conditions. harder to improve and become successful. 
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies.
Writing on the Spot Draft Example
Review Your Informative Essay Using a 
Checklist (10–15 MIN.)  EL
This is your chance to use all that you have learned about 
writing in this unit to decide how best to improve an essay 
in a short period of time. The checklist can be your guide! 
In order to decide what to do next, try these steps:
•  Read over your Informative Checklist and see if you met 
all the requirements.
•  Make some notes on your copy of the checklist to show 
what you did well or what could be improved.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Writing on the Spot draft from Session 4
• Self-stick notes
• Informative Checklist, p. AR34
26 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S5.indd   26 10/29/19   11:35 AM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 5
TRANSFER
Review and Reflect (5 MIN.)
Invite students to use self-stick notes to jot down 
revisions based on their review of the essay against 
the checklist.
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Provide Visual Support
Check students’ understanding of the rubric to help 
them get a clear understanding of what they are 
looking for in their writing. Offer a simplified restatement 
of each bullet. For example: The order of my ideas 
makes sense. 
Model asking yourself questions as you look at your 
work: 
Does the order of my ideas make sense? 
Are my ideas connected? 
Is my tone a little too friendly here? 
Are my sentences the same length? 
Informative Writing Checklist
I need to show how my I’ll check for spelling 
ideas are connected. errors, run-on 
sentences, and 
fragments.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 27
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S5.indd   27 10/29/19   10:27 AM
Session 5
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option A: Session 5
Reviewing and Revising Your Informative Essay
Introduce and Model the Strategy (5–6 MIN.)
Today students will practice how they can use the 
strategies that they learned so far to revise their 
informative essay quickly. Begin by reminding them What Is the Best Measure of Success? 
to be sure they have told a story that matches the 
prompt. Before students review and revise their When reaching toward a goal, students should understand 
essays, show them a model of how you might use that success does not come right away. It is earned through 
the checklist to find ways of improving your piece. hard work and dedication. The best way to measure success 
should be improvement and hard work. Even when things 
Now we can plan our revisions based on the checklist and become challenging or there are rough patches, being 
make the changes. We want to limit our revisions to what successful means not giving up on a goal.  
the checklist asks since that’s how the informative essay For example, for a student who struggles in science class 
will be scored. Once you have a chance to make your becoming a stronger student means doing homework on time, 
revisions, remember to leave some time for editing the studying before tests, and asking for help when needed. All of 
these things take time and persistence for students to improve 
final version. their science class grades. A student might get a better grade 
on one assignment and still struggle with other aspects of the 
class. However, a successful student will learn how to tackle 
Strategy: Using a Checklist to Revise different obstacles as they come. This takes dedication which 
leads to success.  
1. Look at the notes you put on your    This example shows how success is measured through 
checklist. consistently trying to do your best. Doing well in school and 
other goals all require consistency. Without consistency, it is 
2. Make notes on your essay about what harder to improve and become successful. 
you could quickly change.
3. Make those changes. Revision Annotation Example
4. Remember to edit your final version. Add a central idea: 
Being successful 
Add an example and means being 
Use the Strategy details: Improving your consistently good 
(20 MIN.)  EL
Remind students that when they are in a testing grades takes hard at something, not 
situation, they won’t have time to completely rewrite work and persistence just once.
their piece so have them use this time to make the 
revisions that would meet the checklist requirements. 
Invite students to edit their final version. Add a second example 
that supports my thinking: 
acting in a play takes a lot 
of practice and cooperation 
in order to be successful.
28 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_W1S1_S5_TEX.indb   28 10/24/19   1:01 PM
WEEK 1 Option A: Session 5
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect (5 MIN.)
How do you feel about your revised essay? What have you 
learned that you can apply to the next time you are writing 
a informative essay during a test?
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Build Thinking and Language
Display the simplified restatements of each bullet from 
page 27.
Then, offer examples and/or explanations of anything 
students struggle to understand. For example: co-create 
a word bank of transition words that would work for 
their writing. Encourage students to connect their ideas 
using the words in the bank. Examples: also, as an 
example, for example, in addition, for instance, similarly.
Provide students time to orally discuss their ideas for 
revision with a partner before revising.   
Annotated Informative Writing Checklist Example
I could use more I didn’t state it in 
support for my thinking. my first paragraph.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 29
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1A_S5.indd   29 10/29/19   10:26 AM
Session 5
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 1
Analyzing a Prompt and Two Articles
State the Focus and Purpose (2–3 MIN.)
Sometimes, you may be asked to read some articles and What information 
then write an essay during a test. Today, we will look at to look for
two articles and a prompt together. We will mark up the 
articles and analyze what the prompt is asking us to do. 
Then, we will work together to make a plan for how to start 
writing. This will help you when you approach another 
prompt on your own tomorrow.
Learning Goals
WE WILL STUDY: What to do 
✓ What information is contained within a 
prompt with that 
✓ How to collect information from articles for information
an informational essay
✓ How graphic organizers can help us plan our 
writing
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers analyze any texts that are provided.
Analyze a Prompt (2–3 MIN.) EL
Offer some guiding questions to help students 
analyze this model prompt and highlight the Writing to Sources Sample Prompt 
relevant information on the accompanying articles. 
Invite them to work in pairs to discuss answers.
ROFESSIO
PD
EL T
OPMEN ROFESSIO
PD
ROFES E
SI LO ROFES
O S
PMENT IO
Patty McGee PD PD
E ELO
Use Option B during week one to PMENT
L F
O O E
PMENT
ROFESSI S
O S
R IO
MATERIALS PD PD
support students who will be ErLesponding 
OPMENT ES E
• Writer’s Notebook S
ROF IO L T
OPMEN
• Source articles, p. AR16 to source materials during their writing ePxDams. 
If exams are more likely to require studeEnL ts tTOPMEN o ROFESSIO
• Sample prompt, p. AR12
• Graphic Organizer, p. AR35 write based on their own personal experience, PD
EL T
OPMEN
• Chart paper or interactive whiteboard then use Option A during week one.
30 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_W1B_S1_S5_NAT.indb   30 10/24/19   1:22 PM
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
NAL 
NAL 
DEV
DEV 
NAL
NAL 
DEV
DEVL 
NA
NAL 
DEV
 DEV
NAL
AL 
DEV N
DEV
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 1
TRANSFER
Guiding Questions for Analyzing a Prompt 
and Articles
1. How can you restate the prompt in your own words?
2. Which words in the prompt should you underline?
3. What information do you need from the articles?
4. How can you tell which details are important?
5. What part of the task can you do during planning?
6. What part can you do during revising and editing?
Once students have the opportunity to analyze the 
prompt and articles, invite pairs to share their ideas.
Share and Reflect
Pose these questions for reflection:
What can you learn by looking closely at a prompt?
What important facts did you learn from the articles?
How can you organize facts to help you plan your essay?
Invite students to jot thoughts in their notebooks.
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Provide Visual Support
Before reading the articles, check understanding of the 
key words (rescue, roles, publicly) in the prompt. Then, 
make sure students understand the writing task by 
discussing the verb statement. For example: The word 
compare tells the kind of information you will include. 
When you compare two things, what do you write? How 
do you support those comparisons?
After that, discuss the meaning of each Guiding 
Question and what students should look for as they 
read. Invite them to think about the questions as you 
read and make notes to answer them.
Read the articles expressively, and use gestures to 
enhance meaning. Pause at times to allow students to 
make notes. Discuss the answers to the questions and 
the specific details and examples to support them.
Fighting and Spying Alongside Men in the Civil War
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 31
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S1.indd   31 10/29/19   10:39 AM
Session 1
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 1
Analyzing a Prompt and Two Articles
Introduce the Strategy (5–7 MIN.)
Now that we’ve analyzed the writing prompt and 
highlighted important information from the articles, it’s 
time to start planning. We can use a graphic organizer to 
get started. 
Strategy:  Using Graphic Organizers 
to Plan
1. Figure out what the prompt is asking.
2. Look at how you marked up the 
articles. Ask yourself: “How can I put 
this information into one place?”
3. Use a graphic organizer to track the 
needed information.
4. Fill in the chart using information 
from the articles.
Model the Strategy (5–7 MIN.)
Share your graphic organizer. You can fill in one or 
two examples together, then students can continue 
with a partner after you have modeled the strategy.
1. First, I think about what the prompt directs us to do: 
describe the work women did during the Civil War. I use 
the language of the prompt to see what information to 
look for (1) examples of work women did in secret and 
(2) examples of work women performed in public.
2. I looked for the information in the articles. I thought 
about how I could organize that information. In this 
case, I thought a chart would help. In another case, I 
might have used a Venn diagram or a map.
3. I labeled the chart. I made categories from the prompt 
across the top row. These are the things I want to 
describe in my essay.
4. Next, I fill in the chart, using information from both 
articles. This will let me see at a glance how to compare 
the experiences of the women.
Women to the Rescue in the Civil War
32 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   32 10/24/19   1:12 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 1
TRANSFER
Use the Strategy (5 min.)  EL
Invite students to work with a partner or small 
group to fill in the graphic organizer by finding the 
information from the articles.
Review how students filled in their charts, and if 
students had different answers, discuss that as a 
Elizabeth Van Lew spy secret “threatened with bodily 
harm,” recruited by the group.
North
Harriet Tubman scout, nurse, spy, secret, public Chosen to be first Share and Reflect (5 min.)
teacher woman to lead a war Ask students to consider this question.
raid
Jennie Hodgers soldier (Albert D. J. secret “awarded a pension” How can you use a graphic organizer to plan in the future?
Cashier)
Students may discuss their answers with a partner 
female soldiers soldier secret sent home if discovered and/or jot down notes about what they learned 
today. Invite a few students to discuss their ideas 
with the rest of the class.
Women at home sewed, made public positive
bandages, knitted, 
worked in storehouses, 
made ammunition
Northern and Southern nurse—gave medicine, public Allowed women to work 
women managed supplies, in field that was mostly Supporting English Language 
operated, worked on men before EL
ships Development
Dr. Elizabeth Blackwell formed WCAR--trained public Union formed USSC
nurses, improved Build Thinking and Language
battlefield conditions
Discuss key words and phrases used in a compare- 
Jessie Benton Frémont got aid to wounded Secret? Had to get help from and-contrast text structure — i.e., also, similarly, as well, 
soldiers husband
although, however, on the other hand.
Provide common structures used for the writing type, 
and encourage students to use the structures (shown 
below) as they complete the charts. This oral rehearsal 
Completed Graphic Organizer Example will help prepare them for writing.
___ and ___ are similar because they both ___. 
Like ___, ___ is ___.
One way ___ and ___ differ is that ___ is ___ and ___ 
is ___. 
___ is ___, but ___ is ___.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 33
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   33 10/24/19   1:12 PM
Session 1
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 2
Writing on the Spot
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1-2 MIN.)
Today, you will get a chance to practice writing Let me show you a strategy you can use to make sure you 
an informative essay. This type of writing is an take the right steps when completing an assessment test. 
opportunity to state your ideas on a subject and then EL
explain your way of thinking. The goal for today’s 
lesson is to analyze a prompt, plan out your thinking, 
and then do your best to write your essay — all Strategy: Reading the Prompt Before 
within a single writing session. Reading the Passage
Today’s exercise gives you practice for the kind of writing 1. Identify the materials you’ll need to 
tasks that you may see on an actual test. By practicing this complete the writing assessment, 
now, you’ll feel a lot more confident when the time comes to including writing prompt, articles, and 
do it for real.
writing tools.
Learning Goals 2. Read the writing prompt first to get a 
good idea of what the writing task is.
We Will Study:
✓ How to write an informative essay on the spot 3. Ask questions to clarify any points in 
WE WILL WORK ON: the prompt that are confusing.
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely. 4. Begin reading the articles, keeping in 
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely. mind what it is that the writing prompt 
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, will require you to do.
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under 
testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Student Writing Prompt, p. AR13 
• Informative Writing Checklist, p. AR34 
• Graphic Organizer 1, p. AR36 
34 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_W1B_S1_S5_NAT.indb   34 10/24/19   1:22 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 2
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Distribute the Writing on the Spot prompt and the Repeat the strategy for students, and invite them to 
articles “Eli Whitney and the Cotton Gin,” “The now work with a partner to try it out.  EL
Making of the Industrial Revolution,” and “Fueling 
the Industrial Revolution.” Use the prompt and the 
articles to show students how you used the strategy Supporting English Language 
to make sure you understood the requirements of the EL Development
prompt before reading the articles. For example:
Build Thinking and Language
1. First, I identify the materials I’ll need for the assessment. 
Before reading the articles, check student understanding 
For this assessment, I’ll need the writing prompt, the of the key words in the prompt to make sure students 
three informative articles, and my writing tools. understand the task. For example: The word “analyzing” 
2. Next, I read the writing prompt first. This will help me get tells the kind of information you will include. When 
you analyze something, you study the details and offer 
an idea of what the writing task is. Before I start, I want to an explanation. How do you support the explanation? 
understand what is expected of me. Discuss what students should look for as they read. 
3. Then, I ask any questions I have about the prompt. This Then, provide limited background knowledge of the 
is so I can clarify any points or ideas in the prompt that Industrial Revolution. For example, Technology (machines) 
are confusing to me. I want to make sure I understand invented during the Industrial Revolution made it faster 
everything completely. and easier to travel long distances and faster and easier 
to make goods, like clothing. Because of these inventions, 
4. Finally, I begin reading the articles. I only do this after people could travel and buy things they needed for 
I’ve read the prompt. Doing so will help me keep in mind much less money. Finally, pre-teach vocabulary needed 
what it is the prompt wants me to do while I read. That to understand the articles such as cash crop, inventor, 
way, I can notice things in the articles that might be innovative, patented, energy, etc.  
useful to me when I’m writing my essay. Read the articles expressively, and use gestures to 
enhance meaning, while also pausing at times to allow 
students to make notes. 
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 35
Y42185_W1B_S1_S5_NAT.indb   35 10/24/19   1:22 PM
SESSION 2
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 2
Writing on the Spot
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3-4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Invite students to try the strategy orally in Invite students to complete the “Writing on the Spot” 
partnerships. task in their Writer’s Notebooks. Encourage them 
to focus on today’s strategy and on what they know 
Now, it’s your turn. Briefly discuss with your partner how you about writing an informative essay based on sources. 
plan to use the strategy to complete today’s Writing on the Use the Informative Writing Rubric to help you make 
Spot exercise. You will have the chance to read the prompt instructional choices throughout the volume. 
and articles in Independent Writing.
Distribute the “Results of Innovation” graphic 
Allow some time for writers to think this through organizer for students to use as added support when 
first before sharing with partners. Monitor and organizing their ideas.
observe students as they work collaboratively. Check 
in with writers who seem confused and use the Monitor student progress as you simulate a test-
modeling example to provide support as needed. taking environment. Notice what they are doing and 
who may benefit from additional support. Confer 
with individuals as needed while the rest of the class 
work quietly on their own.
L K FORS
✓ Oral rehearsal with the strategy Conferring
✓ Active listening If a student could use some support with choosing 
✓ Discussion of how students will approach the text-based evidence, you might share this strategy:
writing task and why
Make notes about writers who may need additional support 
generating ideas. Focus on developing this during small- Strategy: Citing Text-Based Evidence
group or conferring time.
1. Think about the information you put 
into your chart.
Bridge to Transfer 2. Find the exact wording in the article.
Remind students of what the strategy is, how to do it, 
and when the writer might use this strategy again. 3. Add a quote from the article into your 
essay. Use quotation marks around 
Remember, this strategy is helpful when you are completing 
a writing assessment that requires you to write an the words that come from the text. If 
expository piece based on outside sources. there is no author to cite, you can cite 
the title of the article. 
36 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   36 10/24/19   1:12 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 2
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Conferring Gather students in small groups, and invite them to 
reflect on the following questions:
If a student would benefit from support putting 
information into their own words, a strategy you How did it feel to write an informative essay in one session?
might show that writer is:
How do you think today’s activity will prepare you for exam 
writing during a test?
Strategy: Putting Ideas into Your Own Then invite a few students to share their thoughts 
Words with the class. 
1. Unless you are quoting the article, you 
will need to put ideas into your own 
words. EL Supporting English Language 
Development
2. Ask yourself: Build Thinking and Language
• How would I explain or retell this idea Display the Results of Innovation Graphic Organizer. 
to a friend? Invite students to tell you what kinds of information 
• How can I put two ideas together? belong in each section. Explain the words positive and 
negative as needed. Guide students’ discoveries by 
• How can I add some of my own telling them where they will need to look to find the 
thinking to an idea? negative results (“Fueling the Industrial Revolution” and 
the seventh paragraph of “Eli Whitney and the Cotton 
Gin.”)
As students retell their ideas for applying the strategy, 
Two-Minute Edit invite them to discuss their ideas with classmates who 
Ask students to look back over their essays to edit. Use share their home language and ask for support as 
this time to observe how well students are using the needed. 
conventions.
Grammar Study
As you are planning your grammar study, refer to the lessons 
and learning experiences in the Grammar Study Handbook. 
Adjust your grammar plans in response to what you observe.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 37
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   37 10/24/19   1:12 PM
SESSION 2
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 3
Reviewing and Revising Your Informative Essay
State the Focus and Purpose (1–2 MIN.)
Today you’ll have a chance to review the informative essay 
you wrote on the spot. Take some time and use all that you 
know to revise it. You can go back to the checklist to see 
if you included everything you need to. We will do this in 
just one session, so you’ll want to concentrate on the most 
important revisions and save time for editing.
Learning Goals
We Will Study:
✓ Ways to improve informative essays.
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently 
under testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies. 
Review Your Essay Using a Checklist  
(10–15 MIN.)  EL
This is your chance to use all that you have learned about 
writing in this unit to decide how best to improve it in a Sample Informative Essay Draft
short period of time. The checklist can be your guide! 
•  Read over your Informative Writing Checklist and see if 
you covered everything you needed.
•  Make some notes on your copy of the checklist to show 
what you did well or what could be improved.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Sample Informative Essay, p. AR39
• Session 2 Source Texts, p. AR22
• Self-stick notes
• Informative Writing Checklist p. AR34
38 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_W1B_S1_S5_NAT.indb   38 10/24/19   1:22 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 3
TRANSFER
Review and Reflect (5 MIN.)
Invite students use self-stick notes to jot down 
revisions based on their review of the essay against 
the checklist.
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Provide Visual Support
To help students use the strategy, check their 
understanding of the checklist. Add visuals to support 
the vocabulary where applicable, and allow students to 
note home language translations on their copies. 
Then, have them explain to a partner what they will 
look for in their writing. Provide the following sentence 
frames to facilitate discussion:
I will look for a central idea that ___. 
I will make sure my ideas are ___.
I will look for details that ___. 
I will check my sentences for ___.
I will make sure my tone is ___. 
Informative Writing Checklist
I need more 
details that 
support the Some of my sentences I should fix the order of 
idea that sound too casual. some of my paragraphs 
developments and use clear transitions.
had bad 
results.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 39
Y42185_W1B_S1_S5_NAT.indb   39 10/24/19   1:22 PM
SESSION 3
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 3
Reviewing and Revising Your Informative Essay Make	tone	more	formal.	
Revise	to	be:	Along	with	
the	positive	changes,	
however,	the	developments	
Introduce and Model the Strategy (5–6 MIN.) had	negative	effects.
Today students will practice how they can use 
different strategies to revise their essays quickly. 
Begin by reminding them to be sure they present 
the information from the articles as directed by the 
prompt and remind them to be sure to use transitions 
to help readers follow their ideas. Before students 
review and revise their essays, show them a model 
of how you might use the checklist to find ways of 
improving your piece.
Now you can plan your revision based on the checklist and 
make the changes. We want to limit our revisions to what 
the checklist asks for since that is how the essay will be 
scored. Once you have a chance to make your revisions, 
remember to leave some time for editing the final version.
Strategy: Using a Checklist to Revise
1.	 Look	at	the	notes	you	put	on	your	
checklist.
2.	Make	notes	on	your	essay	about	what	
you	could	quickly	change.
3.	Make	those	changes.
Make	tone	
4.	Remember	to	edit	your	final	version. more	serious
Sample	Annotated	Draft
Use the Strategy Make	negative	impact	
(20 MIN.)  EL
Remind students that when they are in a testing Change	order	of	 on	enslaved	people	
situation, they won’t have time to completely paragraphs	2	and	 clear.	Add:	For	them	the	
rewrite their piece; so, have them use this time to 3	to	be	logical.	 invention	of	the	cotton	gin	
make the revisions that would meet the checklist. Include	transitions	 had	a	negative	impact.
Encourage students to edit their final version. to	make	it	clear.
Include	info	about	danger	
to	coal	miners:	Coal	had	to	
be	dug	underground,	and	
coal	miners	worked	in	very	
dangerous	conditions.
40 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S3.indd   40 10/28/19   12:26 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 3
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect (5 MIN.)
How do you feel about your revised essay? What have you 
learned that you can apply the next time you are writing an 
informative essay during a test or any other time?
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Build Thinking and Language
Use a think-aloud to show how you determine the most 
important changes to make. For example: The rubric says 
I need to use details that support my idea and fit the 
topic. I did this, though I probably could have added more 
support. It also says that the support should come from 
all source articles. I only used two of the articles to make 
my point, so I need to add support from the third article. 
This will be my focus because it is an element that is 
totally missing. I think it will take five minutes to complete, 
so I will definitely be able to check my organization and 
sentence types as well. 
Have students discuss their revisions orally and include 
the amount of time they estimate each task will take. 
Have partners check each other’s time, and offer 
feedback on their strategy and focus. 
Annotated Informative Writing Checklist Example
I need more 
details that 
support the Some of my sentences I should fix the order of 
idea that sound too casual. some of my paragraphs 
developments and use clear transitions.
had bad 
results.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 41
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   41 10/24/19   1:12 PM
SESSION 3
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 4
Analyzing a Prompt and Narrative
State the Focus and Purpose (2–3 MIN.)
Sometimes, you may be asked to read informational texts 
and then write a narrative story based on the details in 
them during a test. Today, we will look at informational texts 
and a prompt together. We will analyze what the prompt 
is asking us to do and look for details that we can use. 
Then we will work together to make a plan for how to start 
writing a narrative. This will help you when you try another 
prompt on your own tomorrow.
Learning Goals
WE WILL STUDY:
✓ What information is contained within a 
prompt
✓ How to look for important details in 
informational texts
✓ How graphic organizers can help us plan our 
writing Include details Provide details about the 
WE WILL WORK ON: about the work of ocean and oceanography 
THE GOALS oceanographers. from informational texts.
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
Analyze a Prompt (10 MIN.)  EL
Offer some guiding questions to help students 
analyze this model prompt and highlight the Narrative Writing Prompt
relevant information in the accompanying articles. 
Invite them to work in pairs to discuss answers.
Once students have had the opportunity to analyze 
the prompt and three articles, invite pairs to share 
what they discovered.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Source texts p. AR26-AR28
• Sample prompt, p. AR14
• Graphic Organizer, p. AR37
• Chart paper or interactive whiteboard
42 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_W1B_S1_S5_NAT.indb   42 10/24/19   1:22 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 4
TRANSFER
Guiding Questions for Analyzing a Prompt 
and Articles
1. How can you restate the prompt in your own words?
2. Which words in the prompt should you underline?
Ideas for 
characters 3. What details can you use to develop the main 
characters?
Details for plot 4. Which details from the informational texts are 
important to include?
Plot: 5. Which part of the task can you do during planning?
Search for 
shipwreck 6. What part can you do during revising and editing? 
Share and Reflect
Hand out the Narrative Writing Checklist. Then 
pose the following questions for reflection:
What can you learn by reading a prompt closely?
Setting How can you use an organizer to collect important 
information?
details
Invite students to jot thoughts in their notebooks.
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Build Thinking and Language
Before reading the articles, check understanding of the 
prompt. For example: The prompt tells us that we are 
writing a story with a clear beginning, middle, and end. 
What does that mean? What does a story include? 
Problem! Provide needed background knowledge about oceans, 
and explain key words related to the content such as 
scientist, mysteries, zone, exploration. 
Discuss the Guiding Questions and what students 
Details about should look for as they read. Invite them to think about 
oceanographers’ the questions and make notes as you read.
tools. As you read the articles, use gestures to enhance 
meaning. Pause at times to allow students to make 
notes. Finally, discuss the answers to the guiding 
questions and the evidence to support them.
Session 4 Source Texts
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 43
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S4.indd   43 10/29/19   11:46 AM
Session 4
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 4
Analyzing a Prompt and Narrative
Introduce the Strategy (5–7 MIN.)
Now that we’ve analyzed the writing prompt and 
highlighted important information in the informational 
texts, it’s time to start planning. I’ve got a graphic organizer 
that can get you started, but you can easily create your 
own. Remember: To answer the prompt, you will need to 
build on the details that come from the source texts.
Strategy: Using Graphic Organizers to 
Collect Story Details
1. Think about what the prompt is asking.
2. Look at how you marked up the story.
3. Use a chart or design another 
organizer to collect the information 
you need.
Model the Strategy (5–7 MIN.)
Share the graphic organizer provided or create your 
own. You can fill in one or two examples together. 
Leave the rest for the students to do with a partner 
after you have finished modeling the strategy.
1. First, I think about what the prompt directs us 
to do: write a story about an ocean exploration. Graphic Organizer
(1) What details do you know about the work of 
oceanographers? (2) What do you know about the 
personalities of people who study the ocean? and (3) 
What do you know about the ocean environment?
2. I look for the information in the informational texts. 
I think about how I can organize that information. In 
this case, I think a chart would help. I want to collect 
important details about the main characters I plan 
to include in the story. I also want to see how I can 
use the articles’ details to create a plot with a strong 
beginning, middle, and end.
3. Next, I fill in the chart, using important details. This will 
let me see at a glance which details I can use in my 
adventure story.
44 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   44 10/24/19   1:12 PM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 4
TRANSFER
Use the Strategy (5 min.)  EL
Invite students to work with a partner or small 
group to fill in the graphic organizer by finding the 
story details.
Review the way students filled in their charts. You 
might discuss students’ different answers as a group.
Me Dr. The team slowly They can’t go deeper A team member Share and Reflect (5 min.)
Shantay makes their descent because it’s too spots something 
Summers into the ocean and dangerous, but else in the water. Ask students to consider this question.
begins to search they’re sure there’s It’s a trunk of 
for a shipwreck they something big below! artifacts from an How can you use a graphic organizer to plan in the future?
believe is in the area. Is it a shipwreck? ancient culture. They 
Joseph Luke made an important Students may discuss their answers with a partner 
Moreno Peterson discovery after all!
and/or jot down notes about what they learned 
(research 
assistant) today. Invite a few students to discuss their ideas 
with the rest of the class.
Have been Team leader Team puts on Use sonar to detect Ballard has found Supporting English Language 
preparing EL
with scuba pressurized suits something big below. 2,000-year-old 
Great Development
training communicator and scuba gear. objects—pots, 
and 
research People can’t go statues, and coins. Build Thinking and Language
Light and more than 1500 
temperature change feet because of the Oceanographers Display the graphic organizer. Invite students to tell you 
Curious Luke as they go deeper. pressure. must be patient.
Peterson what kinds of details belong in each section. To deepen 
Good with understanding, encourage students to add translations 
data and 
computers and make notes in their home language on their 
copies.
As you model completing the graphic organizer, 
pause and invite students to explain how each section 
Graphic Organizer Completed Example connects to the prompt. For example: The bottom 
section of the chart is about details you can use. 
Where does this information come from? How is this 
connected to the rubric?
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 45
Y43337_W1B_S1_S5_TEX.indb   45 10/24/19   1:12 PM
Session 4
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 5
Writing on the Spot
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1-2 MIN.)
Today, you will get a chance to practice writing a narrative Let me show you a strategy you can use to break down the 
piece based on informational texts. This type of writing is an writing prompt into steps when completing an assessment 
opportunity to use your imagination to apply what you learn. test. EL
The goal for today’s lesson is to analyze a prompt, plan out 
the details you will use, and then do your best to write your 
piece — all within a single writing session. One important Strategy: Breaking the Prompt Down 
part of narrative writing is breaking down the instructions in into Steps
the prompt into steps. 1.	 Reread	the	writing	prompt,	sentence	
Today’s exercise gives you practice for the kind of tasks that by	sentence.	
you may find on writing assessments. By practicing this now, 
you’ll feel a lot more confident when the time comes to do 2.	Find	the	first	thing	you	have	to	do	in	
it for real. your	writing.	Jot	this	first	step	down.
3.	Find	the	second	thing	you	will	have	to	
Learning Goals do.	Jot	this	second	step	down.
We Will Study: 4.	Do	the	same	for	the	third	and	fourth	
✓ How to write a creative piece based on a 
narrative on the spot steps.
WE WILL WORK ON: 5.	Keep	these	steps	as	a	checklist	of	to-
THE GOALS: dos	as	you	plan	your	writing.
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under 
testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Writing on the Spot Prompt, p. AR15
• Narrative Writing Checklist, p. AR38
• Narrative Writing Rubric, p. AR33
• Graphic Organizer (optional), p. AR37
Writing	on	the	Spot	Prompt
46 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S5.indd   46 10/29/19   11:57 AM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 5
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Distribute the Writing on the Spot prompt and the Repeat the strategy for students, and invite them to 
source texts for today’s session. Read the prompt now work with a partner to try it out.  EL
aloud and clarify students’ understanding as 
necessary. Demonstrate how to break the prompt 
down into steps. For example:
EL Supporting English Language 
1. First, I reread the prompt, sentence by sentence. I want to Development
look closely at everything the prompt wants me to do. Build Thinking and Language
2. As I reread, I find the first thing I have to do in my writing. Check understanding of the key words (journal entry, 
According to today’s prompt, I need to write a journal viewpoint, sources, beginning, middle, end) in the prompt. 
entry about the climb. I jot this down as my first step. Then, ensure that students understand the writing task by 
eliciting the elements included in a story.
3. Next, I keep rereading. I find the second thing I have to Remind them that they are using information from the 
do. I need to write from the viewpoint of a member of the articles in their journal entries, and discuss what students 
team. I jot this down as my second step. should look for as they read. Write the ideas on the board. 
Guide their thinking as needed. For example: I don’t know 
4. I do the same thing for the third and fourth steps. I keep much about how tall Mt. Everest is or what the weather 
going through the prompt until I’ve jotted down all the on the mountain is like. I need to make sure I look for that 
steps I need to complete. information so it can become a part of my story. I also 
wonder how long it would take to climb it.
5. Finally, I keep these steps as a checklist of to-dos. As I’m 
Pre-teach key vocabulary from the articles such as region, 
planning and structuring my writing, I’ll check back to my continent, peak, trek, avalanche, steep. 
list of steps to make sure that I’ve completed each one. 
Once I have, I can check it off the list. Read the articles expressively, and use gestures to 
enhance the meaning of words like climb and peak. 
Pause before the section “Climbing Mount Everest,” and 
elicit an explanation for how it feels to have trouble 
breathing. 
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 47
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S5.indd   47 10/29/19   11:57 AM
Session 5
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 1 Option B: Session 5
Writing on the Spot
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3-4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Invite students to try the strategy orally in Invite students to complete “Writing on the Spot” in 
partnerships. their Writer’s Notebooks. Encourage them to focus 
on today’s strategy and what they know about writing 
Now, it’s your turn. Briefly discuss with your partner how you a story based on another text. 
plan to use the strategy to complete today’s Writing on the Use the Narrative Writing Rubric to help you 
Spot exercise. You will have the chance to write a narrative gather information for making instructional choices 
based on another narrative in Independent Writing. throughout the unit. Monitor student progress as 
Allow some time for writers to think this through you simulate a test-taking environment. Notice 
first before sharing with partners. Monitor and what students  are doing and who may benefit 
observe students as they work collaboratively. Check from additional support. Confer with individuals as 
in with writers who seem confused, and use the needed while other students work on their own.
modeling example to provide support as needed.
Conferring
If a student could use some support with organizing 
L K FORS the events of their story, a strategy you might show 
that writer is:
✓ Oral rehearsal with the strategy
✓ Active listening
✓ Identification of details from the prompt to 
turn into steps Strategy: Rereading the Prompt 
✓ Using the steps to plan a narrative 1.	 After	you	finish	your	draft,	read	the	
Make	notes	about	writers	who	may	need	additional	support	 prompt	one	more	time.
generating	ideas.	Focus	on	developing	this	during	small-
group	or	conferring	time. 2.	Notice	everything	the	prompt	asks	for	
and	put	a	check	next	to	each	thing	
Bridge to Transfer you	completed.
Remind students of what the strategy is, how to do 3.	If	any	is	left	without	a	check,	go	
it, and when the writer might use this strategy again. back	to	your	draft	and	make	some	
Remember, this strategy is helpful when you are completing changes.
a writing assessment that requires you to write a narrative 
based on a writing prompt.
48 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S5.indd   48 10/29/19   11:56 AM
WEEK 1 Option B: Session 5
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Conferring Gather students in small groups, and invite them to 
reflect on the following questions:
If a student would benefit from support for 
connecting events, a strategy you might show that How did it feel to write a narrative in one session?
writer is:
How do you think today’s activity will prepare you for exam 
writing during a test?
Strategy: Making Sure Your Story Has Then invite a few students to share their thoughts 
a Point with the class. 
1.	 Jot	down	the	point	your	story	is	making.
2.	Choose	the	way	you	want	to	make	that	 Supporting English Language 
point.	It	could	be	by: EL Development
•	Having	a	character	state	the	point	in	 Build Thinking and Language
dialogue. Ask partners to discuss their steps for using the strategy, 
•	Having	the	narrator	make	the	point	in	 allowing them to use their home language if needed. 
narration. Then, invite them to use their graphic organizers to help 
them retell their story ideas. Encourage them to speak 
•	Making	the	reader	infer	the	point	 as though they were remembering something that 
based	on	one	or	more	characters’	 happened to them.
actions. If time permits, have them switch partners and retell their 
story ideas again.
3.	Make	sure	to	include	your	point	in	your	
narrative.
Narrative	Checklist
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 49
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W1B_S5.indd   49 10/29/19   11:56 AM
Session 5
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 6
Revising and Editing Your Essay
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1-2 MIN.)
Today you’ll have a chance to review one of the pieces that Let me show you a strategy you can use to quickly edit on 
you didn’t get a chance to revise. Take some time, and see the go when completing an assessment. EL
how you might use all that you have learned to rework and 
revise it. You can go back to the checklist to see if you met 
all the requirements. We will do this in just one session, so Strategy: Editing Section-by-Section
you’ll want to concentrate on the most important revisions 
and save time for more editing. 1.	 Begin	with	the	first	paragraph	or	
section	of	your	writing.
Learning Goals 2.	Read	through	this	section	to	find	any	
spelling	changes	you’d	like	to	make.
We Will Study:
✓ Ways to improve personal narratives. 3.	Go	back	and	review	to	find	any	
WE WILL WORK ON: punctuation	changes.
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely. 4.	Go	back	and	review	to	find	any	
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely. capitalization	changes.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar. 5.	Repeat	these	steps	with	the	next	
ROFESSIO
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under section	of	your	wrPitDing.
testing conditions. EL T
O F
PMEN RO ESSIO
P
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing D
using familiar strategies. ROFES E
SI LO MENT
ROFES
O S
P IO
Patty McGee PD PD
EL T SS E
IO FESS
If you worked on OO IO
pPMtE
N L T
ion A laROFE O
st week, PMEN RO
P
you can use this opportunity D
PD
E to have E
L NT
O L
ROFESSIO ENT
PME OPM
students to spend a little more time rePviDsing 
and editing the personal narrative essELay tTOPMEN hey SS
ROFE IO
wrote. If you worked on Option B last week, PD
ELOPMENT
then use this opportunity to revise and edit 
the piece they wrote based on the narrative 
source text. 
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Self-stick notes
50 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_S6_S10_NAT.indb   50 10/24/19   1:31 PM
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
NAL 
DEV N
AL 
L DE
V
NA  
DEV N
AL 
DEV
NAL 
NAL 
DEV
 DEV
NAL
L 
DEV N
A
DEV
WEEK 2: Session 6
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Show students how you used the strategy to review Repeat the strategy for students, and invite them to 
writing section-by-section for spelling, punctuation, now work with a partner to try it out.  EL
and capitalization edits. For example:
1. First, I begin with the first section of my writing.
EL Supporting English Language 
2. Next, I skim the section to find any spelling changes Development
I’d like to make. At this point, I’m just going to focus on Build Thinking and Language
misspellings that I might have made. Review the sections of the checklist that pertain to 
3. Then, I go back and skim again, this time focusing on spelling, punctuation, and capitalization. Find out what 
students know about the rules for each, and build on 
punctuation changes. their understanding. Write rules on the board for student 
4. After that, I go back a third time to find capitalization reference.
changes.
5. When I’ve finished these three checks, I go on to the next 
section of my piece. I’ll repeat these steps.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 51
Y42185_S6_S10_NAT.indb   51 10/24/19   1:31 PM
Session 6
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 6
Revising on the Spot
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3-4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Invite students to try the strategy orally in Invite students to use today’s strategy while they 
partnerships. revise and edit one of their Writing on the Spot 
pieces from Week 1. Monitor student progress as 
Now it’s your turn. Briefly discuss with your partner how you simulate a test-taking environment. Notice what 
you plan to use the strategy to edit your writing section-by- they are doing and who may benefit from additional 
section. What will you check for the first time you review a support. Confer with individuals as needed while the 
section? The second? The third? rest of the students work quietly on their own.
Allow some time for writers to think this through Conferring
first before sharing with partners. Monitor and 
observe students as they work collaboratively. Check If a student could use some support finding their 
in with writers who seem confused, and use the own mistakes, you can share this strategy:
modeling example to provide support as needed.
Strategy: Finding Your Own Mistakes
L K FORS 1.	 Check	the	beginning	of	every	sentence	
✓ Oral rehearsal with the strategy for	a	capital	letter.
✓ Active listening 2.	Check	the	end	of	every	sentence	for	
✓ Discussion of what aspects of editing writers 
will focus on during each pass punctuation.
Make	notes	about	writers	who	may	need	additional	support	 3.	Check	every	sentence	for	a	subject,	a	
generating	ideas.	Focus	on	developing	this	during	small- verb,	and	a	complete	thought.
group	or	conferring	time.
4.	Read	the	sentences	from	last	to	first	
to	scan	for	other	mistakes.	
Bridge to Transfer
Remind students of the strategy, how to do it, and 
when the writer might use this strategy again. 
Remember, this strategy is helpful when you are 
completing a writing assessment. You can use it to polish 
your work so that it is the best it can be.
52 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   52 10/24/19   1:28 PM
WEEK 2: Session 6
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Conferring Gather students in small groups and invite them to 
reflect on the following questions:
Review any prior strategies that would help students 
finish their narrative pieces. How did it feel to revise and edit work you wrote quickly?
How do you think today’s activity will prepare you for exam 
Two-Minute Edit writing during a test?
Ask students to look back over their essays to edit. Use 
this time to observe how well students are using the Then invite a few students to share their thoughts 
conventions. with the class. 
Grammar Study
As you are planning your grammar study, refer to the lessons 
and learning experiences in the Grammar Study Handbook. EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Adjust your grammar plans in response to what you observe. Provide Thinking and Language
Display the compiled rules for spelling, capitalization, 
and punctuation from page 51. As home language 
partners edit text, circulate and offer support. Guide 
them to identify misspelled words, missing punctuation, 
or missed capitalization. Provide dictionaries as needed. 
Have students use correct vocabulary as they explain 
each edit they are making to their partners. Invite 
partners to tell whether they agree or disagree with each 
edit. Allow them to use their home language if needed. If 
necessary, point out examples of incorrect conventions 
and spellings, and guide students to edit them. Offer an 
explanation of each edit. For example: This sentence 
is long and has three ands in it. How can we edit it to 
produce two or three shorter sentences?
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 53
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   53 10/24/19   1:28 PM
Session 6
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 7
Revising for Structure 
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1–2 MIN.)
Today, we’ll take a look at how to revise passages on an Use this strategy to help you respond to questions that ask 
assessment. We’ll use a model passage like one you might you to make revisions for meaning and sense: EL
be given on an actual test, but you can use these strategies 
in your own writing as well. The kind of questions that relate 
to meaning and logical organization might include: Strategy: Answering Revision 
Questions
• Add a detail where it belongs.
1.	 Read	the	passage	and	give	a	brief	
• Take out a sentence that is off topic. summary	of	it.
• Use a transition to connect ideas. 2.	Read	the	question	and	restate	what	it	
• Choose the best ending. is	asking	you	to	do.
3.	Look	at	the	choice	and	try	them	out	
Learning Goals with	the	passage.	
We Will Study: 4.	Decide	which	answer	choice	makes	the	
✓ Ways to revise passages on assessments most	sense.	
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under 
testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies. 
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Model Passage and questions for Session 7, p. AR40
• Practice Passage and questions for Session 7, p. AR42
Session	7	Model	Passage	and	Questions
54 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_S6_S10_NAT.indb   54 10/24/19   1:31 PM
WEEK 2: Session 7
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Show students how you use the strategy to answer Repeat the strategy for students and invite them to 
meaning-related questions with the model passage. rehearse it with a partner before trying it on their 
You may wish to read the passage aloud first or give own.  EL
students time to read it independently. After you 
model one or two questions, you might let students 
work together during Guide Practice to finish 
answering them. EL Supporting English Language 
Development
1. First, I read and summarize the tall tale. It’s about how Build Thinking and Language
Pecos Bill squeezed water from a tornado to end a Explain the question types, and display them in short 
drought. The tale also claims he created Death Valley in sentences, using a quick sketch to enhance meaning. 
California when the tornado dropped him from the sky. After you read each test item, ask students to restate it to 
2. Then read the first question. To be sure I understand what check their understanding. Explain the question type.  
it asks, I put the question into my own words. Where For example, for item 1, say: This question is asking me to 
should I add the sentence “Bill’s parents didn’t realize he add a detail to the text. I must determine where this detail 
was gone until it was too late” to the tall tale? fits best. 
Then, do a think-aloud as you think through each answer. 
3. I look at all the choices. After sentence 2 makes sense For example: Answer A is “after sentence 2.” I will find 
since that sentence says that Bill fell out of his parents’ sentence 2. Next, I will read sentence 2 and the sentence 
covered wagon. I’ll keep that in mind and look at the next from the test. Then I will ask myself: Does that make 
choice. After sentence 10 doesn’t make sense since the sense? 
passage hasn’t mentioned Bill’s parents since the first Invite students to discuss the answer. 
paragraph. After sentence 11 doesn’t work either since 
Allow students to discuss answers with classmates who 
Bill and the narrator are now talking about Bill and the 
share their home language.
tornado.  After sentence 16 doesn’t seem right because 
this part of the story tells about what happened after Bill 
ended the drought. 
4. I think A is the best choice. The new sentence goes best 
after sentence 2, so I mark the answer A as correct. 
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 55
Y42185_S6_S10_NAT.indb   55 10/24/19   1:31 PM
Session 7
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 7
Revising for Structure 
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3–4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Hand out the passage and questions for students 
Now it’s your turn! Try out the strategy with a partner. You’ll to practice on their own. Ask students to pretend 
get a chance to talk about and finish the questions that we that they are taking a test, and make sure they are 
started together. working silently and as briskly as they can.
Allow time for students to try one or two questions 
in the model passage together, talking about which Conferring
answers they picked and why. When students are Sit with any student who could use some extra 
finished, you can share the correct answers and let support revising test passages. Two strategies that you 
them see how they did. might share are:
L K FORS Strategy: Identifying an Off-Topic 
Sentence
✓ Students reading passages 
✓ Students practicing answering the questions 1.	 Think	about	the	purpose	of	the	
strategically passage.	The	purpose	is	what	the	
✓ Students comparing their answers to the 
correct answers author	is	trying	to	do.
✓ Students sharing impressions and challenges 2.	Think	about	whether	this	sentence	
with the group
helps	the	author	achieve	the	purpose.
Make	notes	about	students	who	may	need	additional	
support	answering	assessment	questions	and	provide	help	 3.	If	the	sentence	has	information	that	
during	the	conferring	time. takes	the	reader	away	from	the	
author’s	purpose,	then	it	doesn’t	
Bridge to Transfer belong.
Next you’ll have some time to work independently 
answering questions with a new passage. This will give you 
some good practice and make you feel confident the next 
time you see questions like these! Remember to read the 
passage carefully and look at the questions strategically!
56 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   56 10/24/19   1:28 PM
WEEK 2: Session 7
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Invite students to share their answers by taking a 
Strategy: Eliminating Wrong Answers poll. Give them the correct answers. Then invite any 
1.	 Read	the	question	carefully. volunteers to share their reflections with the class 
on how easy or how challenging they thought the 
2.	Read	the	first	answer	choice.	If	you’re	 questions were and why. 
absolutely	certain	it’s	wrong,	eliminate	
it—either	on	the	paper	or	just	in	your	
head.	If	you’re	not	certain	it’s	wrong,	 EL Supporting English Language 
Development
leave	it	for	later. Build Thinking and Language
3.	Move	on	to	the	next	answer	choice	and	 As students work through their questions, encourage 
repeat	steps	1-2.	(Keep	repeating	this	 them to determine the type of each question based on 
step	until	you	have	read	all	the	answer	 the list you made on page 55. Allow students to get help 
from classmates who share their home language, and 
choices.) ask questions about vocabulary as they work. 
4.	Reread	the	question	and	the	answer	 Invite students to share their reasons for their answers 
choices	that	remain.	Choose	the	BEST	 with you. Ask questions to help them think through 
answers. For example: How did you decide what 
answer. sentence should be deleted? What steps did you take?
Session	7	Practice	Passage	 Session	7	Practice	Questions
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 57
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   57 10/24/19   1:28 PM
Session 7
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 8
Editing for Clarity 
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1–2 MIN.)
Today, we’ll take a look at how you can edit sentences on This is how you approach questions that ask you to edit 
an assessment. You might be asked to make changes for sentences: EL
clarity or to improve the style of the writing. You can use the 
strategies we’re going to practice on an assessment, but 
you can also use them to look at sentences in other writing. Strategy: Editing Sentences on an 
The kind of questions that involve editing sentences might Assessment
include:
1.	 Read	the	passage.	Then	read	the	
• Choosing the right punctuation question	and	restate	what	it	is	asking	
• Fixing subject/verb agreement you	to	do.
• Combining two sentences properly 2.	Look	at	the	choice	and	try	them	out	
with	the	passage.	
• Using prepositional phrases correctly
3.	Decide	which	answer	choice	makes	the	
most	sense.	
Learning Goals
We Will Study:
✓ Ways to edit sentences on assessments.
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under 
testing conditions.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s Notebook 
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Model Passage and questions for Session 8, p. AR44
• Practice Passage and questions for Session 8, p. AR46
Session	8	Model	Passage	and	Questions
58 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W2_S8.indd   58 10/29/19   12:03 PM
WEEK 2: Session 8
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Show students how you use the strategy to edit Repeat the strategy for students, and encourage them 
sentences in the model passage. You may wish to to rehearse it with a partner before trying it on their 
read the passage aloud first or give students time to own. EL
read it independently. After you model one or two 
questions, you might let students work together 
during Guided Practice to finish answering them.   EL Supporting English Language 
1. First I read the passage and then I read the first question. Development
To be sure I know what it asks I’ll restate the question in Build Thinking and Language
my own words. I’m looking at a sentence that might or Explain the question types, and display them in short 
might not have a mistake in punctuation. If it’s not right, I sentences, using a quick sketch to enhance meaning. 
can choose A, B, or C. If it’s correct, I can choose D.  After you read each test item, ask students to restate it to 
check their understanding. Explain the question type.  
2. I look at the choices. I can see the sentence is not 
correct. It’s a run-on. That means I won’t pick choice D. For example, for item 1, say: This question is asking me to 
Now, I will check the other choices. Choice A is not right identify a sentence fragment. First, I recall the definition 
because the period creates a sentence fragment. Choice of a fragment. I know that a sentence has a subject and a 
B is punctuated like a compound sentence. but the first verb, so a fragment must be missing one of those things. 
Then, I will read each option, circling the subject and 
part is a run-on. The third choice, C, has three actions in underlining the verb.  
a series with a comma after each item. 
Then, do a think-aloud as you think through each answer. 
3. I decide on the best choice. Choice C shows the right For example: I will read the sentence for answer A. Then, I 
punctuation. will ask myself: What is the subject of the sentence? What 
is the verb?  This one is kind of tricky because the verb is 
4. Then I continue to the next question and repeat this part of a contraction. But the verb “is” in “it’s” makes it a 
process again. complete sentence. 
Invite students to discuss the answer. 
Allow students to discuss answers with classmates who 
share their home language.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 59
Y42185_S6_S10_NAT.indb   59 10/24/19   1:31 PM
Session 8
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 8
Editing for Clarity 
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3–4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Hand out the passage and questions for students to 
Now, it’s your turn! Try out the strategy with a partner. You’ll practice on their own. Ask students to pretend that 
get a chance to talk about and finish the questions that we they are doing this on a test, so they should be sure 
started together. they are working silently and as briskly as they can.
Allow time for students to try one or two questions 
in the model passage together, talking about which Conferring
answers they picked and why. When students are Sit with any student who could use some extra 
finished, you can share the correct answers and let support with revising. Two strategies that you might 
them see how they did. share are:
L K FORS Strategy: Replacing Vague 
Descriptions
✓ Students reading passages 
✓ Students practicing answering the questions 1.	 Find	the	places	in	your	text	where	you	
strategically provide	a	description.
✓ Students comparing their answers to the 
correct answers 2.	Ask	yourself	if	your	reader	would	
✓ Students sharing impressions and challenges be	able	to	imagine	what	you’re	
with the group
describing.
Make	notes	about	students	who	may	need	additional	
support	answering	assessment	questions,	and	provide	help	 3.	If	not,	think	about	words	that	bring	
during	this	conferring	time. the	senses	to	life—sight,	taste,	sound,	
feel,	or	smell.	Ask	yourself:	“Is	there	
Bridge to Transfer a	sensory	word	I	can	use	to	make	this	
Next, you’ll have some time to work independently description	more	vivid?”
answering questions with a new passage. Remember 4.	Revise	the	description	to	make	it	
that this will give you some good practice and make you stronger	and	clearer.	
feel confident the next time you see questions like these! 
Remember to read the passage carefully and look at the 
questions strategically!
60 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   60 10/24/19   1:28 PM
WEEK 2: Session 8
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Invite students to share their answers by taking a 
Strategy: Checking Punctuation poll. Give them the correct answers. Then, invite any 
1.	 Think	about	all	you	know	about	 volunteers to share their reflections with the class on 
how easy or hard they thought the questions were 
punctuation. and why. 
2.	Start	by	reviewing	your	piece	for	end	
punctuation.	Check	for	the	correct	
use	of	periods,	question	marks,	and	 EL Supporting English Language 
Development
exclamation	points. Build Thinking and Language
3.	Next,	check	to	make	sure	the	 As students work through their questions, encourage 
punctuation	inside	your	sentences	is	 them to determine the type of each question based on 
correct.	Ask	yourself: the list you made on p. 59. Allow students to get help 
from classmates who share their home language, and 
•	Do	I	need	a	comma	before	this	 ask questions about vocabulary as they work. 
conjunction? Invite students to share their reasons for their answers 
•	Would	a	dash	work	better	here? with you. Ask questions to help them think through 
•	Did	I	use	quotation	marks	properly? answers. For example: What is a run-on sentence?  
How did you know where to divide the run-on into two 
separate complete thoughts?
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 61
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   61 10/24/19   1:28 PM
Session 8
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 9
Editing to Polish
State the Focus and Purpose  Say the Strategy
(1–2 MIN.)
Today we’ll take a look at how you can make corrections Here is a way you can approach questions that ask you to 
to words on an assessment. You might be asked to make choose words: EL
changes for all different kinds of errors. You can use the 
strategies we’re going to practice on assessments, but you 
can also use these strategies to make corrections in your Strategy: Deciding How to Correct a 
own work. The kind of questions that involve incorrect words Sentence on an Assessment
might include:
1.	 Read	the	passage	and	the	first	
• Knowing the difference between plurals and possessives question.	
• Forming irregular verbs 2.	Restate	the	question	to	make	sure	you	
• Choosing between comparatives and superlatives understand	what	it	is	asking.
• Using subjective or objective pronouns 3.	Read	the	choices,	and	try	them	out	
with	the	passage.	
Learning Goals 4.	Decide	which	answer	choice	makes	
We Will Study: the	most	sense.	
✓ Ways to edit sentences on assessments
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently under 
testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies.
MATERIALS
• Writer’s  Notebook
• Interactive whiteboard, chart paper, or notebook with a 
document camera
• Model Passage and Questions for Session 9, p. AR48
• Practice Passage and Questions for Session 9 p. AR50
Session	9:	Model	Passage	and	Questions
62 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W2_S9.indd   62 10/29/19   12:09 PM
WEEK 2: Session 9
TRANSFER
Teach the Strategy 
(10 MIN.)
Model the Strategy Say the Strategy Again
Show students how you use the strategy to edit Repeat the strategy for students and invite them to 
sentences in the model passage. You may wish to rehearse it with a partner before trying it on their 
read the passage aloud first or give students time to own.  EL
read it independently. After you model one or two 
questions, you might let students work together 
during Guide Practice to finish answering them. EL Supporting English Language 
Development
1. First, I read the passage, and then I read the first 
question. To be sure I know what it asks, I put the Build Thinking and Language
question into my own words. I’m looking at sentence 3, Explain the types of test items. Then, list them in short 
which might or might not have a mistake. If it’s not right, I sentences on chart paper with examples. Briefly explain 
can choose A, B, or C. But if it’s correct, I will choose D.  the grammar as needed:  
1. Know the difference between plurals and possessives. 
2. I look at the choices. I can see all of the choices have Plural: girls, games; Possessives: singular — Sylvia’s book, 
apostrophes in different places, except for one choice, C. plural — the students’ scores on the test.  
First I need to figure out if these nouns should be plurals 2. Form irregular verbs: go-went; see-saw; keep-kept. 
or possessives. If they are possessives, then I’ll think 3. Choose between comparatives and superlatives. 
about whether they are singular or plural possessives. Comparatives: bigger, more interesting; Superlatives: 
That will tell me where the apostrophe goes.  biggest, most interesting.  
4. Use subjective and objective pronouns. Subjective: I, he, 
3. I decide on the best choice. Choice C is the best one she, they; Objective pronouns: me, him, her, them. 
because these nouns are not possessive. They are not After reading the passage and checking for 
showing ownership of anything. They are just plural understanding, read each test question.  Ask students to 
nouns, so there shouldn’t be any apostrophes. retell what the question is asking them to do. 
Then, do a think-aloud as you think through each answer. 
4. Then, I will continue to the next question and repeat this For example, for item 1, say: First, I read the first sentence 
process again. in the text and pay close attention to the verb tense 
because that is what the question is about. “Has been 
written” is the verb. Then, I read the answer choices and 
try to find the correct one. The action happened in the 
past, but it is continuous. So, it’s the present perfect tense.
Invite students to think through each question with you.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 63
Y42185_S6_S10_NAT.indb   63 10/24/19   1:31 PM
Session 9
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 9
Editing to Polish
Guide Practice  Independent Writing 
(3–4 MIN.) and Feedback
Jot, Talk, and/or Listen EL Independent Writing
Hand out the passage and questions for students to 
Now, it’s your turn! Try out the strategy with a partner. You’ll practice on their own. Ask students to pretend that 
get a chance to talk about and finish the questions that we they are doing this on a test, so make sure they are 
started together. working silently and as briskly as they can.
Allow time for students to try one or two questions 
in the model passage together, talking about which Conferring
answers they picked and why. When students are Sit with any student who could use some extra 
finished you can share the correct answers and let support with superlatives, comparatives, or 
them see how they did. pronouns. Two strategies that you might share are:
Strategy: Choosing Comparatives or 
L K FORS Superlatives
✓ Students reading passages 
✓ Students practicing answering the questions 1.	 First,	figure	out	what	is	being	
strategically compared—for	example,	cats,	plants,	
✓ Students comparing their answers to the books--in	your	class	library.	
correct answers
✓ Students sharing impressions and challenges 2.	Then,	count	how	many	things	are	being	
with the group compared,	such	as	two	cats,	three	
Make	notes	about	students	who	may	need	additional	support	 plants,	ten	books.
answering	assessment	questions,	and	provide	help	during	
this	conferring	time. 3.	If	you	are	comparing	two	things,	use	
the	comparative.	Shorter	comparatives	
usually	end	in	–er	(faster)	while	longer	
Bridge to Transfer ones	are	formed	by	using	more	+	
Next, you’ll have some time to work independently adjective/adverb	(more	playful).
answering questions with a new passage. Remember 
that this will give you some good practice and make you 4.	If	you	are	comparing	more	than	two	
feel confident the next time you see questions like these! things,	use	the	superlative.	Shorter	
Remember to read the passage and the questions carefully! superlatives	usually	end	in	–est	
(greenest)	while	longer	ones	are	
usually	formed	by	using	most	+	
adjective/adverb	(most	suspenseful).	
64 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   64 10/24/19   1:28 PM
WEEK 2: Session 9
TRANSFER
Share and Reflect  
(5 MIN.)
Invite students to share their answers by taking a 
Strategy: Using Pronouns Correctly poll. Give them the correct answers. Then, invite 
1.	 First,	think	about	the	word	that	the	 any volunteers to share their reflections with 
the class on how easy or hard they thought the 
pronoun	is	replacing.	That’s	called	the	 questions were and why. 
antecedent.
2.	Then,	think	about	whether	the	
antecedent	is	singular	or	plural,	 EL Supporting English Language 
Development
masculine	or	feminine	so	you	can	 Build Thinking and Language
match	it	up	with	the	right	pronoun,	
As students work through the passage and questions, 
such	as	he, she,	or	them. circulate and encourage them to determine the type of 
3.	Next,	ask	yourself	if	the	pronoun	is	 each question based on the list on the board you made 
on p. 63. 
the	subject	of	a	phrase	or	sentence.	
Invite students to share the reasons for their answers 
If	the	pronoun	is	a	subject,	choose	a	 with you. Ask questions to help them think through 
subjective	pronoun,	such	as	I, he, she, answers. For example: What does it mean to shift? 
they.	If	it’s	not,	choose	an	objective	 How did you determine which sentence from the text 
changed tenses?
pronoun,	such	as	me, him, her, them.	
Ask pairs to share their answers with each other and 
explain them. Monitor and clarify as needed. 
Throughout the activity, allow students to get help from 
classmates who share their home language. 
Session	9:	Practice	Passage	and	Questions
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 65
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   65 10/24/19   1:28 PM
Session 9
TEST-TAKING AS A GENRE  WEEK 2: Session 10
Taking a Practice Test
State the Focus and Purpose (2–3 MIN.)
Today, you will write an opinion speech. This is an 
opportunity to share an opinion about something you 
really care about. The goal for today’s lesson is to write 
a speech that states and explains your opinion and 
persuades others to agree with you.
Learning Goals
WE WILL STUDY:
✓ Writing, revising, and editing under testing 
conditions
WE WILL WORK ON:
THE GOALS:
✓ Writers read instructions closely.
✓ Writers analyze any texts that are provided.
✓ Writers make a plan to use their time wisely.
✓ Writers use their best spelling, punctuation, 
and grammar.
✓ Writers work quietly and independently 
under testing conditions.
✓ Writers organize and develop their writing 
using familiar strategies.
Try Taking a Practice Test (40 MIN.)  EL
Allow students time to do a test run with a practice 
assessment. 
Remember to choose the writing prompt that 
matches the option, A or B, that you chose during 
the first week. 
MATERIALS
• Practice Test, Prompt Option A, p. AR52 or Prompt 
Option B, p. AR53
• Practice Test, Revising and Editing, p. AR62
• Practice Test Answer Key, p. AR66
• Informative Writing Rubric, p. AR32
Writing Task Option A Prompt (top), Option B Prompt (bottom)
66 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W2_S10.indd   66 10/29/19   12:14 PM
WEEK 2: Session 10
TRANSFER
Look-Fors
Use the Answer Key and Writing Rubrics for 
Informative Writing to help you assess how well 
students have done on this practice test.
Share and Reflect (5 MIN.)
Pose the following questions:
1. What was tricky and what felt easy?
2. How were you able to use what you learned?
Encourage writers to discuss their answers with 
a partner. Then invite a few pairs to share their 
reflections with the class.
EL Supporting English Language 
Development
Build Thinking and Language
Check that students understand the words in the 
prompt such as pride and trait (Option A) and valuable 
(Option B).
ESS
ROF IO
WritiPngD Task Option B Source Text Before students begin, allow them time to ask 
EL T
OPMEN ROFESSIO classmates who share their home language for help in 
PD understanding the prompt and the task. 
E
S L NT
ROFES IO O ESS
PME ROF IO
Patty McGee P P Review vocabulary about each topic. For example, for 
D D Option B, show a piece of gold. Then, show the areas 
EL T E
O L T ES
ROFESSI
P O O S
This is a great chance for MsE
N
tudentPs Dto PMEN F
RO IO
PD where gold has been mined on a map (California, 
practice writing, revising, and editEing in an E Egypt, Greece, Asia Minor). 
L T
O S L T
PMEN ROFES IO OPMEN
assessment environment. Set up the classroPomD as Before students start, help them set time limits for the 
you would during a test. Remind children toE LworTk ES
O SI
PMEN ROF O tasks to stay focused as they write and revise. 
alone, silently. Explain the time constraints. Getting PD
E If students take the multiple choice test, make sure 
L T
OPMEN
familiar with working under these conditions can they have the necessary background knowledge (the 
help students feel more prepared and relaxed location of the Statue of Liberty and what a first lady is) 
during an actual assessment. and understand the vocabulary in the text – especially, 
idioms and expressions such as “scraped together” and 
“shuddered to think.”
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC 67
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_W2_S10.indd   67 10/28/19   12:49 PM
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
Session 10
L 
NA
L 
DEV N
A
L DE
V
NA
DEV N
AL 
L D
EV
NA
AL 
DEV N
AL D
EV
N
 
DEV N
AL
DEV
Y43337_S6_S10_TEX.indb   68 10/24/19   1:28 PM
Additional 
Resources
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_Tabs.indd   5 10/24/19   12:27 PM
Additional Resources
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_Tabs.indd   6 10/24/19   12:27 PM
Additional Resources
Additional Resources
Table of Contents
Alignment to Reader’s Workshop ............................. AR2
We ek 1 Option A Resources: 
Prompts.................................................................. AR3 
Rubric .................................................................... AR6 
Reproducibles ...................................................... AR7 
Sample Essays .................................................... AR10
We ek 1 Option B Resources: 
Prompts................................................................ AR12 
Source Texts ........................................................ AR16 
Rubrics ................................................................ AR32 
Reproducibles .................................................... AR34 
Sample Essay ...................................................... AR39 
We ek 2 Resources: 
Passages and Questions .................................... AR40 
Practice Test ........................................................ AR52 
Answer Key ......................................................... AR66
Caregiver Letter ....................................................... AR67
Strategy Bank ............................................................ AR68
AR1
AR1 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_TOC.indd   1 10/24/19   12:34 PM
W R I T E R ’ S
Writer’s Workshop • Alignment to Reader’s Workshop  W O R K S H O PTM
Grade 5 Instructional AlignmeWnRtI T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
R E A D E R ’ S W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM W O R K S H O PTM
Week Reader’s Workshop Units Writer’Ws WR oIrkTshEopR ’VoS lumes
W O R K S H O PTM
0
3 Weeks Launching the Reader’s Workshop 4 Weeks Volume 1: 
1
Writer’s Workshop Kickoff
2
3
3 Weeks Unit 1: 
4 Partners in Survival 6 Weeks Volume 2:  
5 Writing as a Scientist
6 Genre: Informational Texts
3 Weeks Unit 2:  Mentor Text
7 Mentor Text: Partners in Survival 
Characters Develop Relationships (Reader’s Workshop – Unit 1)
8
9
3 Weeks Unit 3: 
10
Our Changing Constitution 6 Weeks Volume 3:  
11
Stories of Growing Up
12 Genre: Memoirs
3 Weeks Unit 4: Mentor Text
13 Mentor Text: Developing Relationships 
 Distinct Voices, Diverse Perspectives (Reader’s Workshop – Unit 1 and Unit 2)
14
15
3 Weeks Unit 5: 
16
Innovation in a Changing World 6 Weeks Volume 4:  
17
Writing as a Historian
18 Genre: Informational Texts
3 Weeks Unit 6: 
19 Mentor Text Mentor Text: Our Changing Constitution 
Struggles for Survival (Reader’s Workshop – Unit 3)
20
21
3 Weeks Unit 7: 
22
The American Revolution 2 Weeks Volume 5: 
23 Test-Taking as a Genre
24
3 Weeks Unit 8: 6 Weeks Volume 6: 
25
Water Taking a Stand for Our Future 
26 Genre: Arguments
Mentor Text
27 Mentor Text: Innovation in a Changing World 
3 Weeks Unit 9: (Reader’s Workshop – Unit 5)
28 Economies in Transition
29
30
3 Weeks Unit 10: 3 Weeks Volume 7:
31 Exploring Matter  Nonfiction Meets Poetry
32 Genre: Informational Poetry/Mentor Text: Water 
(Reader’s Workshop – Unit 8 and Unit 10)
33 Mentor Text
AR2 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
G5_V2_ALIGNMENT_PAR2.indb   2 6/13/19   5:02 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 1
READ the information in the box below.
Some people are adventurous risk-takers while  
others prefer to participate in activities they are 
familiar with.
THINK about whether you are a risk-taker or would rather do what 
feels familiar and safe.
WRITE about what whether you have an adventurous or cautious 
personality. Explain why that approach works for you. 
Be sure to:
• clearly state your central idea
• organize your writing
• develop your ideas with details
• choose your words carefully
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR3
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   3 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 2
READ the information in the box below.
People choose their friends for many different reasons.
THINK about what it means to be a good friend.
WRITE about what qualities a good friend has. Explain why those 
qualities are important.  
Be sure to:
• clearly state your central idea
• organize your writing
• develop your ideas with details
• choose your words carefully
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
AR4 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   4 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 4
READ the information in the box below.
People think of success in many ways, including: 
being famous, having a lot of money, being respected, 
having an important job, or being happy.
THINK about what makes a person successful.
WRITE about what you consider to be the best measure of success. 
Explain your thinking. 
Be sure to:
• clearly state your central idea
• organize your writing
• develop your ideas with details
• choose your words carefully
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR5
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   5 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A RUBRICS
Opinion Writing Rubric
4 3 2 1
The response: The response: The response: The response:
• consistently • generally • generally • does not address 
addresses the addresses the addresses the the prompt or 
prompt. prompt. prompt. genre.
Writing Focus, • has clear • has a mostly clear • has limited • lacks organization 
organization. organization. organization and and coherence.
Organization, coherence.
and • uses details • uses details that • missing details 
Development that effectively mostly clarify • uses minimal making writing 
clarify meaning. meaning. details with unclear.
limited clarity.
The response: The response: The response: The response:
• exhibits full • exhibits some • exhibits limited • does not 
command of command of command of demonstrate 
convention the convention convention command of 
expectations for expectations for expectations for convention 
Language grade level. grade level. grade level. expectations for 
and grade level.
• has few, minor • has some errors • has many errors 
Convention errors that do that occasionally that detract from • has many errors 
not detract from detract from meaning. that impede 
meaning. meaning. understanding.
Key: 4–exemplary  3–accomplished  2–developing  1–beginning
AR6 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   6 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A REPRODUCIBLES
Session 1: Personality Traits
Adventurous
Cautious
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR7
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   7 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A REPRODUCIBLES
Opinion Checklist
Name: _________________________________________    My Topic: __________________________
My essay is  I have a main idea that answers the prompt.
organized
 I explain my thinking with reasons.
 I put my ideas into a logical order. 
 I connect my ideas so the reader can follow  
my thinking.
My essay is well  I find details and examples to use from my own life.
supported 
 I use details and examples to explain my thinking.
 I choose details and examples that fit the topic.
My language clear  I choose my words carefully and my tone is serious  
and precise but friendly. 
 My sentences are complete (not fragments or  
run-ons), and they are different lengths.
 I have used my best spelling, capitalization,  
and grammar.
AR8 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   8 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A REPRODUCIBLES
Session 2: A Good Friend
Name: _________________________________________     My Topic: __________________________
Is Does
Says Doesn’t Say
Qualities of a Good Friend Reasons
1. 1.
2. 2.
3. 3.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR9
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1A_Reproducibles.indd   9 10/29/19   12:30 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A SAMPLE ESSAYS
Sample Opinion Essay
PROMPT: Write about what qualities a good friend has.  Explain why 
those qualities are important.
The Most Important Qualities in a Friend 
Friends are an important part of life. Different people look for different 
qualities in a friend. I think a good friend should be a good listener, trustworthy, 
and supportive.
A friend should be a good listener. This is because we often go to a friend 
with our worries or when we run into trouble. Sometimes you need someone 
to talk a problem over with, and to do this, the friend needs to listen. Having 
someone listen to you is important.  
Not only should a friend be a good listener, but you need to be able to 
trust him or her. If you are going to a friend with a problem, you want to feel 
confident that your friend won’t tell other people. Sometimes we share things 
with a friend that we don’t want other people to know. When a friend tells me 
something personal, I keep it to myself. This is because I know my friend trusts 
me to not repeat what she shares with me with other people. If this happens, 
then trust is lost and it’s very hard to be friends with someone after that.  
Lastly, it’s important that a friend be supportive. We all make mistakes in life, 
and when you are in trouble or do something wrong, you need a friend to turn 
to. A friend is someone who will still be your friend even when you mess up. It’s 
also important to support a friend during good times, too. A friend should be 
happy for you and celebrate your successes. 
Friends come in all shapes and sizes, and we will meet many friends 
throughout life. A friend may have many qualities, but being a good listener, 
trustworthy, and supportive are the most important qualities. These are the 
qualities I value in a friend.  
AR10 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   10 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION A SAMPLE ESSAYS
Sample Informative (Expository) Essay
PROMPT: Write about what you consider to be the best measure of 
success. Explain your thinking.
What Is the Best Measure of Success?
When a student pursues a goal, success does not happen immediately. It 
is earned through hard work and dedication. Therefore, the best measure of 
success should be continuous improvement. Being successful does not only 
mean being able to do something correctly once but consistently. Even when 
things become harder or there are rough patches, being successful means not 
giving up on your goal.  
For example, for students who struggles with science class becoming  
stronger students means doing homework on time, studying before tests, 
listening to the teacher, and asking for help when needed. All of these things 
take time and persistence for students to improve their science class grades. 
A student might get a better grade on one assignment and still struggle with 
other aspects of the class. However, a successful student will learn how to 
tackle different obstacles at they come. This takes dedication which leads to 
success.  
Another example is learning a role for a play. An actor does not get 
on stage right after being assigned a role. There is a lot of work that goes 
into successfully acting in a play. First he needs to memorize his lines. Then 
the director helps the cast and crew bring the words to life through many 
rehearsals. These things take time to master and do well consistently. Actors 
rehears for roles for weeks sometimes months so that when the time comes for 
the final performance there are no mistakes and the audience is entertained. 
An actor’s dedication to playing a role well. 
Both of these examples show how success is measured through consistently 
trying to do your best. Doing well in school, participating in a play and other 
goals all require consistency. Without consistency it is harder to improve and 
become successful.  
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR11
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   11 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 1
DIRECTIONS: You read the articles “Women to the Rescue in the Civil 
War” and “Fighting and Spying Alongside Men in the Civil War.” Now 
think about key details in each article that show the special roles that 
women took on to aid the war effort and how people responded to their 
actions. 
Write an essay describing women’s work during the Civil War, comparing 
the work they did in secret with the duties they performed more publicly. 
Use specific details and examples from both articles to support your 
ideas.
Be sure to: 
• clearly identify information from each article 
• organize your ideas 
• develop your ideas with examples and details 
• choose your words carefully 
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
AR12 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   12 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 2
DIRECTIONS: You read the articles “Eli Whitney and the Cotton Gin,” 
“The Making of the Industrial Revolution,” and “Fueling the Industrial 
Revolution.” Now think about key details in each article that show how 
developments in technology led to developments and changes in other 
areas of American life. 
Write an essay analyzing how innovations in technology had both 
positive and negative results. Use specific details and examples from all 
three articles to support your ideas.
Be sure to: 
• clearly identify information from each article 
• organize your ideas 
• develop your ideas with examples and details 
• choose your words carefully 
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR13
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   13 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 4
DIRECTIONS: You will use the information in “Oceanography," “Depths of 
the Ocean,”and “Exploring the Ocean Deep” to write a narrative story 
for a collection of stories about different careers.
Write a story that is several paragraphs long about your exploration 
of the ocean with a team of oceanographers. Your story will be read 
by students who are considering different careers. Be sure to use the 
information that you learned about in the sources when your write about 
the exploration. Your story should have a clear beginning, middle, and 
end.
Be sure to: 
• clearly identify information from each article 
• organize your ideas 
• develop your ideas with examples and details 
• choose your words carefully 
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
AR14 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   14 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B PROMPTS
Writing Prompt: Session 5
DIRECTIONS: You will use the information in “The World’s Tallest 
Mountain” and “Exploring Everest” to write a narrative journal entry 
about your climb up Mt. Everest as a member of Sir Edmund Hilary’s 
team. 
Write a story that is several paragraphs long from the viewpoint of one of 
a team members. Be sure to use the information that you learned about 
in the sources when you write about the climb. Your story should have a 
clear beginning, middle, and end.
Be sure to: 
• clearly identify information from each article 
• organize your ideas 
• develop your ideas with examples and details 
• choose your words carefully 
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR15
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   15 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Fighting and Spying Alongside Men in the Civil War
1  In 1860, southern states started to secede, or withdraw, from the United 
States over the issue of slavery. Southern states wanted slavery to continue. 
The northern states wanted slavery to end. Soon, the Civil War began in 1861 
between the Union (northern states) and the Confederacy (southern states). 
Thousands of men fought on both sides, but women also played an important 
role in the war. Some held positions that were behind-the-scenes, such as 
helping enslaved people secretly make their way to freedom, or by passing 
along important information about the enemy. Others disguised themselves 
as men and fought on the front lines of the battlefields. These women risked 
their lives to help the war effort. 
2  Elizabeth Van Lew was a socialite who lived in Richmond, Virginia. Virginia 
was one of several southern states that seceded from the United States.  Van 
Lew thought secession and slavery were wrong. In 1861, the Confederacy 
housed Union prisoners in Richmond. Van Lew brought food, books, and 
medicine to the Union soldiers at the prison. 
3  Despite being  threatened with bodily harm, she wanted to do more to 
help the Union. She began carrying secret messages for prisoners. She even 
planned some escapes, hiding the men in her home. When a Union general 
heard of her actions, he recruited her to spy on the Confederacy for the 
Union. She wrote secret messages using a clear liquid. When another person 
received a message, he or she simply brushed some milk onto the paper, 
which turned the message black so that it could be read. 
4  Another woman on the front lines during the Civil War was Harriet Tubman. 
Before the war, Tubman worked to free hundreds of enslaved people. Once 
the war began, Tubman became an active worker for the Union as a scout, a 
nurse, and a spy. She also taught formerly enslaved women skills that would 
earn them wages in the Union army. Her most notable act was to lead 300 
African American soldiers on an expedition to a Confederate post on the 
Combahee River in South Carolina. The expedition blew up weapons and 
supplies and freed over 720 enslaved people. It was the first raid of the war 
led by a woman.
GO ON
AR16 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   16 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Fighting and Spying Alongside Men in the Civil War  
(continued)
5  Women not only acted as spies but also disguised themselves as men 
and fought. At the time, the military did not have strict procedures for enlisting 
soldiers. So if a woman cut her hair, wore loose clothing, and smudged her 
face with dirt, she could pass for a young man. For example, at the age of 
nineteen, Jennie Hodgers enlisted in the Union infantry in Ohio under the 
name of Albert D. J. Cashier. She fought in forty battles over four years and 
survived the war. Hodgers was awarded a pension after the war, but the fact 
that she was a woman was not revealed until 1914, a year before she died. 
A fellow soldier from the same company as Albert D. J. Cashier made this 
statement about Cashier in 1915: “About two years ago, I learned that Albert 
D. J. Cashier is a woman. I never suspected anything of that kind. . . . When 
I was examined for enlistment, I was not stripped and a woman would not 
have had any trouble passing the examination.” 
6  Female soldiers often kept to themselves so they wouldn’t be discovered. 
If a disguised woman was uncovered, it was usually due to illness or injury. 
Typically, the result of such a discovery was that the woman would be sent 
home. Mary Owens, who had enlisted as John Evans and served for eighteen 
months, was shot in the arm and discovered to be a woman. She was sent 
home to Pennsylvania where she received a warm reception and press 
coverage. Even prisoners of war who were revealed to be women were sent 
home by the enemy.  
7  The Civil War era was the first time in American history that women played 
such an active part in a war effort. Before the war, women were trying to 
change their traditional roles in society—to be able to hold office, run a 
business, own property, and work outside of the home. During the war, many 
women proved that they were capable of taking on these challenges. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR17
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   17 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Women to the Rescue in the Civil War
1  When men headed off to Civil War battlefields in 1860, women were called 
to action on the home front. In both the North and the South, women had 
to prepare for the war. Some went to the front lines to care for the wounded, 
while others formed societies to promote the well-being of the soldiers. 
Women who stayed at home also contributed. They sewed uniforms, made 
bandages, and knitted socks and gloves. They planted gardens to feed the 
troops. Other women worked in storehouses and manufactured ammunition.  
Cesar’s parents became migrant workers. They moved from place to place. 
They worked in fields owned by other people picking crops. It was hard, tiring 
work. Living conditions were usually poor. Some places had no bathrooms. 
Some had no running water. Some had no electricity.
2  Before the Civil War, most nurses were male. However, with so many men in 
battle, women began taking over the profession. Thousands of women nursed 
soldiers on and off the battlefields in the South and the North. Nurses made 
the wounded more comfortable and administered medicines when available. 
More than 20,000 women from the North and South volunteered to work in 
hospitals, mostly as nurses. They also wrote letters for the soldiers and read 
to them and managed supplies for hospital doctors, kitchens, and laundries. 
Some women even did surgical procedures. Hospitals sprang up in homes 
and other buildings as the number of wounded grew beyond the capacity of 
established hospitals. The sheer volume of patients, combined with insufficient 
supplies, made tending to the sick grueling work.  Other times the growers 
treated the workers unfairly. Once, the Chavez family was hired to pick 
cherries. The grower said he would pay two cents per pound. The family did 
the work. Then the grower decided to only pay one cent per pound.
3  In 1849, Elizabeth Blackwell became the first woman doctor in the 
United States. During the war, Dr. Blackwell helped form the Women’s Central 
Association of Relief (WCAR). This organization trained nurses to aid the 
wounded. It also pressured the government to inspect sanitation on the 
battlefield. In response, the Union established the United States Sanitary 
Commission (USSC). However, the government did not fund the commission, 
so it was up to ladies’ societies to raise money for it. 
GO ON
AR18 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   18 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Women to the Rescue in the Civil War (continued)
4  One of the women to help raise this money was Jessie Benton Frémont, 
wife of Union General John Frémont. She was an integral member of the 
Ladies’ Union Aid Society (LUAS) in Saint Louis. She urged her husband to 
create a special order that would help provide aid to wounded soldiers. This 
order enabled the establishment of some hospital ships, which transported 
soldiers from the field to hospitals. Female nurses dressed in black attended 
to the wounded on the ships. 
5  In the 1860s, many people thought that a woman should fill the role 
of a housekeeper, wife, and mother. However, as the Civil War pulled men 
away from their homes, women in both the North and the South shattered 
previously held views by taking on important roles in the war. They collected 
and handed out supplies and nursed the sick and wounded. There was a 
clear sense of patriotism on both sides of the conflict that was not unique to 
men. Regardless of how women contributed to the war effort, they showed 
how women could contribute to society. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR19
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   19 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Eli Whitney and the Cotton Gin
Using Eli Whitney's machine to process cotton
1  Across the southeastern United States, in a region known as the Cotton 
Belt, cotton has been a cash crop for more than 200 years. Beginning in 
the 1700s, planters there grew and harvested cotton for sale, rather than for 
personal use, on their large farming plantations. Cotton was picked, cleaned, 
and woven by hand. It took many people thousands of hours to prepare the 
bales of cotton in order for it to be sold.  
The Invention of the Cotton Gin 
2  Eli Whitney was an inventor. As a youth, he made and sold many objects, 
including nails and hatpins. After completing his studies at Yale College, 
Whitney went to work on a Southern cotton plantation. There Whitney would 
invent a machine that would transform the nation. 
3  At that time, enslaved laborers of African descent planted, harvested, 
and processed cotton crops. Whitney quickly observed the challenges of 
processing cotton. Separating the cotton fibers from their seeds was tedious 
and labor-intensive work. This task took the most time to complete. So Whitney 
developed a machine that separated the seeds from the fibers. He called it a 
cotton “gin”—short for engine. 
4  Whitney’s cotton gin had a simple design. Two rotating brushes, mounted 
in a box, pulled the cotton fibers, or lint, through small slots, separating the 
fiber from the seeds. The brushes were turned by a hand crank. Before the 
cotton gin, it could take an enslaved laborer a whole day to clean one 
pound of cotton lint by hand. Using Whitney’s cotton gin, that person could 
clean as much as fifty pounds of lint per day. 
GO ON
AR20 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   20 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Eli Whitney and the Cotton Gin (continued)
5  On March 14, 1794, Eli Whitney received a patent for his design. The patent 
meant that he owned the rights to the intellectual property, or idea, for the gin.  
How the Cotton Gin Impacted the South  
6  The invention of the cotton gin led to other developments and changes. The 
most direct effect was the increase of cotton production. Planters realized that 
with this efficient machine, they could process more cotton in a harvest and 
meet the increasing demand from Northern factories. Planters could then make 
more money, too. Planters began to replace other, less lucrative, crops with 
cotton. Soon the Cotton Belt was producing more cotton than any other place 
in the world. People called cotton “white gold.” The South became the “cotton 
king.” However, the invention of the cotton gin had devastating consequences. 
7  The rise in cotton crops led to an increased demand for enslaved laborers 
to plant and pick the cotton. As a result, slavery spread across the Deep 
South. Prior to the cotton gin, there were about 700,000 enslaved men, women, 
and children in the South. Most were forced to work on the tobacco plantations 
in Virginia and the rice plantations in South Carolina and Georgia. By 1860, the 
population of enslaved people was close to four million, many of whom were 
forced to work on cotton plantations.  
8  The cotton gin was just one piece of a larger industrial network that 
changed the nation. The invention of the steam engine affected the cotton 
industry, too. Steamboats traveled quickly, which meant the supply of goods 
could be shipped to market faster in order to meet the rising demand. Once 
the cotton was in factories, large steam-powered looms were used to weave 
the cotton into fabric faster than ever before. This allowed factories to mass-
produce textiles.  
9  The increase of production provided America with an overabundance, or 
surplus, of cotton to sell to other countries. In 1790, before cotton-processing 
machines, cotton farmers in the United States produced a total of 3,135 bales 
of cotton per year. Within fifty years, cotton production had increased to more 
than one million bales per year.  
10  One man’s idea for a machine affected America, and the world, in many 
ways. The cotton gin helped pave the way for widespread industrialization, 
reshaping the economy and people’s daily lives for better and for worse. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR21
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   21 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
The Making of the Industrial Age
Bessemer process in operation at steel works, Sheffield, England
1  Many engineering technologies we take for granted today are products of 
the Industrial Revolution. New inventions “revolutionized” manufacturing and 
transportation. The effects of the Industrial Revolution were widespread. From 
the first textile mills to the Ford assembly line, from the water-powered looms 
to the steam-powered turbines, the Industrial Revolution helped change 
America and the way Americans lived.   
Steam Engine  
2  In the early part of the Industrial Revolution, textile mills and other factories 
relied on moving water to run their machines. The steady flow of water from 
fast-moving rivers provided energy that turned waterwheels, which powered 
the machines. But rivers could not be moved from one location to another. So 
factories had to be built directly along a water source. This was not practical, 
so inventors looked for a better, more efficient, way to power machines. They 
focused on building a new technology—a steam engine.  
3  In 1781, a Scottish inventor named James Watt patented a steam-powered 
engine. Steam engines could run anywhere that water and wood or coal fuel 
was available. By using burning wood or coal fuel, the water could be heated 
and converted to steam, which powered the gears of the engine.  
4  The steam engine gave rise to John Fitch’s steamboat in 1787 and 
to Richard Trevithick’s steam railway locomotive in 1804. These inventions 
revolutionized transportation. They allowed raw materials and goods to be 
transported faster and farther than ever before. 
GO ON
AR22 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   22 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
The Making of the Industrial Age (continued)
One of the earliest steam engines, "Puffing Billy" 
Steel 
5  Steel is an example of how innovative new methods changed an industry. 
Steel is an extremely strong and ductile metal made from iron and carbon. 
Prior to the 1850s, iron ore was smelted into pig iron in a blast furnace using 
charcoal. Then the pig iron was “fined” into wrought iron, which was then 
forged into steel. The multistep process was slow and costly. Few furnaces 
could get hot enough to melt wrought iron into steel. As a result, steel was 
expensive and was used in only a few products, such as knives or swords. 
6  Then in the 1850s, an American named William Kelly and an Englishman 
named Henry Bessemer both patented processes for mass-producing steel. 
The Bessemer method of steelmaking, as it came to be known, forged steel 
from pig iron. Shortening the process allowed steel to be forged faster at a 
lesser cost. An increase in steel productivity made steel less expensive. 
7  Steel was now more affordable, and it could be used in many 
different products. The affordability of steel allowed more machines to be 
manufactured. The mass production of steel also helped launch other 
industries. Railroads could be constructed across the nation to carry goods 
and materials from coast to coast. Skyscraping towers more than a thousand 
feet high could be erected. Eventually, even cars could be built. All of these 
used steel. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR23
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   23 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
The Making of the Industrial Age (continued)
Cars
8  At the turn of the twentieth century, the automobile was a fancy new 
contraption enjoyed only by the people who were wealthy. Cars were difficult 
to make and were built by hand, which made them expensive. Most people 
could not afford a car. Then in 1913, Henry Ford and his Ford Motor Company 
developed a new method for manufacturing. He used an innovative system 
called an assembly line to mass-produce a car called the Model T. The 
assembly line soon changed the way that most goods were manufactured. 
Factories adapted the concept to produce many different goods, such as 
shoes, household goods, and early electronics. 
9  Ford also developed machines that could stamp out car parts from steel 
and other metals. The machines did the work faster and more accurately than 
humans could. Instead of taking twelve hours to assemble a single car, a car 
could be put together in just two and a half hours. All of these improvements 
allowed Ford to make more cars more efficiently. Since he could make 
more cars cheaper and faster, Ford was able to charge less. Cars became 
affordable to more people. That made the demand for new cars even higher. 
By the mid-1920s, there were over ten million Model T cars on the road. 
GO ON
AR24 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   24 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Fueling the Industrial Revolution
Engine drawing coal in the Staffordshire, England coilleries
1  Many of the machines built during the Industrial Revolution were 
powered by a new technology, the steam engine. Steam-powered engines 
revolutionized transportation. The technology was used not only in factories 
but also to power steamboats and steam railway locomotives. These new 
modes of transportation allowed raw materials and goods to be transported 
faster and farther than ever before. 
2  By the late 1700s, the demand for steam power grew and with it the 
demand for a fuel source that could heat water to generate steam energy. 
At first, wood was burned. As the 1800s wore on, forests across the Northeast 
were cleared for lumber and wood fuel. By 1870, wood fuel became scarce.  
3  Coal soon became the major fuel source for steam power. Coal is a black 
rock that forms over millions of years deep within Earth from the remains of 
plants or animals. In the 1800s, coal was plentiful in Britain and the United 
States.  
4  Compared with wood, coal burns more slowly and therefore provides 
more energy. This made coal more efficient for powering steam engines. But 
coal is not easily extracted from Earth. Coal has to be mined, which means 
digging deep underground.  In the late 1800s, coal miners faced dangerous 
conditions as they dug for coal. By the 1950s, the use of coal in industry 
and transportation declined. However, coal is still used today for producing 
electricity.  
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR25
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   25 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Oceanography
1  An oceanographer is a scientist who studies the ocean. There are four 
kinds of oceanographers. One kind focuses on life science, or biology. 
Another deals with earth science, or geology. Still another studies the physical 
energy in the oceans. And yet another is concerned with the basic materials, 
or chemicals, of the sea. Each kind of oceanographer helps all scientists 
better understand the mysteries of Earth’s seas and oceans. 
2  Being an oceanographer is often quite adventurous and fun. But it also 
requires a lot of hard work. Special training is needed. And oceanographers 
must have certain personal qualities. 
3  Oceanographers must know a lot of science and math and how to work 
with computers. They must pay attention to details and enjoy analyzing data. 
Oceanographers also have to be good communicators. They need to write 
reports about their discoveries for other scientists and students. 
4  Oceanographers need other skills, too. They must be curious about the 
world. They should care about the health of living creatures and the entire 
planet. Oceanographers rarely do their exploring and researching alone. 
So they need to be able to work well with others. A project can take years to 
complete, so oceanographers need to be patient. And, of course, they should 
love to swim and dive. 
Meet an Oceanographer 
5  Robert Ballard knows all about exploring ocean depths. He is a geological 
oceanographer. He is interested in the rock formations under the sea. Ballard 
has made more than 120 research trips. He has traveled around the world 
and he has discovered amazing things. He found sea creatures in places 
where scientists thought nothing could live. He found underwater volcanoes. 
But his discoveries aren’t just of natural things. In 1985, Ballard was the first 
oceanographer to discover the wreck of a famous ship called the Titanic. 
Ballard and his crew still hunt for shipwrecks. They have found boats, clay 
pots, stone statues, and metal coins. Some of those objects are more than 
2,000 years old! Ballard says, “The deep sea is the largest museum on Earth. It 
contains more history than all other museums on Earth combined.” He wants 
to keep exploring all the hidden history that the oceans contain. 
GO ON
AR26 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   26 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Depths of the Ocean
1 Imagine that you are diving down into the ocean. As you travel more than six 
miles from the surface to the ocean floor, you pass through different levels. You 
notice changes in the light, temperature, and pressure. As you go deeper, the 
water gets darker and colder and the pressure increases. Each level presents 
a unique habitat where different kinds of animals live. The three main zones 
are the sunlight zone, the twilight zone, and the midnight zone.  
2 The sunlight zone: This is the top layer of the ocean, where sunlight 
penetrates the water. Plants need sunlight to survive, so this is the only zone 
where you’ll find ocean plants such as phytoplankton (fy-toh-PLANK-tun) and 
seaweed. More than ninety percent of all marine life lives here, such as sharks, 
sea turtles, and seals and sea lions.  
3 The twilight zone: Almost no light can penetrate water at this dark, murky 
depth. It’s too dark for plants to grow here. Only a few smaller animals live 
here, preying on other animals or eating the dead plants and animals that 
fall from the sunlight zone. In this dim zone, animals such as squid must detect 
their prey by vibrations and scent. Another twilight zone animal, the silver 
hatchetfish, has large eyes that allow it to see in the darkness.  
4 The midnight zone: The water pressure here is immense. The only light in these 
depths comes from animals with built-in “flashlights.” Down here you’ll find hot 
water vents—cracks in the ocean floor that shoot out incredibly hot water 
filled with minerals. Bacteria thrive on the heat and minerals, providing a food 
source for deep-sea animals. The gulper eel, for instance, has an enormous 
mouth and an expandable stomach. Scientists believe the eel’s large mouth 
allows it to eat a variety of prey when food is scare.  
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR27
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   27 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Exploring the Ocean Deep
1  Believe it or not, scientists have explored only one percent of the world’s 
oceans. Underwater exploration is difficult in this vast, dark, and cold 
environment. The main problem is the incredible pressure—which can be 
16,000 pounds per square inch in the deepest trenches. That’s like having 
the weight of an entire elephant on your toe! This is why divers can’t go 
more than a few hundred feet deep—even with scuba (air) gear to help 
them breathe. A few hundred feet below the surface, the pressure is so great 
it would crush a diver’s body. Even with a pressurized suit, divers can reach 
depths of only 1,500 feet.  
2  Special vehicles known as submersibles are needed to go deeper than 
1,500 feet. These vehicles are designed to withstand pressures in different 
ocean depths. There are different kinds of submersibles: 
3  •  Manned submersibles, such as Alvin, Johnson Sea Link, and Trieste, carry 
a human crew. 
4  •  Remotely operated vehicles (ROVs), such as Kaiko and Jason Jr., don’t 
carry people. Scientists use cameras and computers to operate ROVs 
from manned submarines. 
5  Submersibles give us a close-up look at the ocean floor, but how do 
scientists measure ocean depths, identify mountain ranges, and find deep-
sea trenches? In the early days, sailors measured ocean depths by lowering 
weights tied to a long piece of rope into the water. The depth was measured 
by noting how much of the rope was in the water when the weight hit the 
bottom. Today, scientists are able to get a much better sense of what lies 
beneath the surface of the oceans. One technique they use is sonar. Sound 
waves are “bounced” off the ocean floor, and the time it takes them to return 
is measured.  
6  Another way scientists study the ocean floor is from space. Just as ships 
use sound waves, satellites circling Earth bounce microwaves off the ocean 
floor. These readings give a much more detailed picture of the oceans’ 
geography, from subtle hills and valleys to hidden trenches.
GO ON
AR28 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   28 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
The World’s Tallest Mountain
1  Standing at 29,028 feet, or five and a half miles above sea level, Mount 
Everest is the highest mountain in the world. For reference, passenger planes 
fly at an altitude of about 35,000 feet in the air.  The mountain is named after 
Englishman Sir George Everest, who was the first to record the location and 
height of the mountain. 
2  Everest is located on the border between Nepal and Tibet. Tibet is a region 
of China. The mountain is part of the Himalayan mountain range. Long ago, 
there were no Himalayan mountains. Instead, there was an ocean between 
India and Asia. Then, 40 million years ago, India crashed into the Asian 
continent, pushing up the Himalayas as it moved. Believe it or not, India is still 
moving two inches a year, making the mountains even taller!
Climbing Mount Everest
3  Reaching Everest’s peak is not easy. Climbers face bitter cold winds while 
trekking through heavy snow. Deep crevasses in the ice open and close all 
the time, making the climb very dangerous. Then there is the blowing snow, 
which makes it difficult to see, even just a few feet ahead. Powerful winds 
have actually blown climbers right off the mountainside! Avalanches, moving 
at speeds of 200 miles per hour, are the biggest killers of all.
4  The higher up climbers go, the less air there is to breathe. Climbers must 
make several trips from base camp to higher and higher camps on the 
mountain until their bodies get used to the lack of oxygen. At the top of 
Everest, there is only one-third as much oxygen as at sea level. Most (but not 
all) climbers need extra oxygen. Upon reaching the summit, climbers can 
stay for only a few moments. If they stay any longer, the lack of oxygen can 
weaken them, making the trek down difficult.
5  Don’t like the cold? Then climbing Mount Everest is not for you. On Mount 
Everest, nighttime temperatures can drop to as low as –100° Fahrenheit! 
Climbers risk getting frostbite—that’s when a body gets so cold that it freezes. 
In extreme cases, frostbite can result in the loss of a finger or toe.
6  Between avalanches, frostbite, lack of oxygen, and other dangers, why 
would anyone want to climb Mount Everest? In the words of British climber 
George Mallory, “Because it’s there.”
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR29
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   29 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Exploring Everest
1  For many people, Mount Everest is more than rocks, snow, and ice. The 
Sherpas, who are native to the Himalayan region, have always thought that 
the mountain is holy. They call it “Chomolungma,” which means “Mother 
Goddess of the Earth,” because they believe it is the home of the gods. Before 
the early 1900s, no Sherpas climbed the mountain because of this belief.
2  Born and raised on the mountains, Sherpas are skilled climbers. Famous 
for their physical strength at high altitudes, they have guided other climbers 
since the earliest Everest expeditions. Sherpas are not the only ones to admire 
Mount Everest. For years, people all over the world wanted to be the first to 
plant their country’s flag on its peak. Many tried but failed. 
George Mallory
3  George Mallory from Britain led the earliest organized attempt to climb 
Everest in 1921. Overcome by illness, exhaustion, and bad weather, the 
explorers never made it to the top, but they did find a route to the summit. 
Determined to conquer Everest, Mallory returned to the mountain in 1922. He 
still could not make it to the top.  In addition, his team, walking slowly through 
heavy snow, set off an avalanche, killing seven Sherpas. During his third and 
final attempt in 1924, something went wrong again. High on Everest’s slopes, 
Mallory and a team member vanished only 800 feet from the summit. Their 
disappearance remains one of mountain climbing’s greatest mysteries to this 
day. For many years after Mallory’s death, climbers tried to reach the top of 
Everest, but it wasn’t until 1953 that anybody would stand on the “roof of the 
world.”'
Edmund Hillary
4  In that year, another British team arrived in the Himalayas. Sixteen days 
after leaving Katmandu on foot, Edmund Hillary of New Zealand, Tenzing 
Norgay of Nepal, and the rest of the British team reached the base of the 
mountain. After trekking 170 miles, they were still only at the bottom! 
GO ON
AR30 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   30 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SOURCE TEXTS
Exploring Everest (continued)
5  Pushing on, Hillary led some of the team up one of the steepest and 
most dangerous parts of the climb, the Khumbu (KOOM-boo) Icefall. Roped 
together, Hillary and Norgay cut through deep ice, making their way around 
hidden crevasses. After establishing a camp at 27,900 feet, the rest of the 
team went back down the mountain, leaving the two men to make the final 
ascent on their own. Faced with a forty-foot vertical snow cliff, they used every 
ounce of energy to work their way up. Hour after hour, the men cut steps into 
the ice, pulling themselves over ridge after ridge, until finally there was no 
more mountain to climb.  They had done it!  Hillary and Norgay were on top of 
the world. They were the first to reach the summit of Everest. 
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR31
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W1B_SourceText.indd   31 10/24/19   2:48 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B RUBRICS
Informative (Expository) Rubric
4 3 2 1
The response: The response: The response: The response:
• Consistently • Generally • Generally • Does not 
addresses the addresses the addresses the address the 
Writing prompt prompt prompt prompt or text 
Focus, type
Organization, • Has clear • Has a • Has limited 
organization mostly clear organization • Lacks 
and organization and coherence organization 
Development • Uses details that and coherence
effectively clarify • Uses details that • Uses minimal 
meaning mostly clarify details with • Missing details 
meaning limited clarity making writing 
unclear
The response: The response: The response: The response:
• Exhibits full • Exhibits some • Exhibits limited • Does not 
command of command of command of demonstrate 
Language convention the convention convention command of 
expectations for expectations for expectations for convention 
and grade level grade level grade level expectations for 
Conventions grade level
• Has few, minor • Has some • Has many errors 
errors that do errors that that detract • Has many errors 
not detract from occasionally from meaning that impede 
meaning detract from understanding
meaning
Key: 4–exemplary  3–accomplished  2–developing  1–beginning
AR32 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   32 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B RUBRICS
Narrative Rubric
4 3 2 1
The response: The response: The response: The response:
• Consistently • Generally • Generally • Does not 
addresses the addresses the addresses the address the 
Writing Focus, prompt prompt prompt prompt or text 
type
Organization, • Has clear • Has a • Has limited 
and organization mostly clear organization • Lacks 
Development organization and coherence organization 
• Uses details and coherence
that effectively • Uses details that • Uses minimal 
clarify meaning mostly clarify details with • Missing details 
meaning limited clarity making writing 
unclear
The response: The response: The response: The response:
• Exhibits full • Exhibits some • Exhibits limited • Does not 
command of command of command of demonstrate 
convention the convention convention command of 
Language and expectations for expectations for expectations for convention 
grade level grade level grade level expectations for 
Conventions grade level
• Has few, minor • Has some • Has many errors 
errors that do errors that that detract • Has many errors 
not detract from occasionally from meaning that impede 
meaning detract from understanding
meaning
Key: 4–exemplary  3–accomplished  2–developing  1–beginning
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR33
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   33 10/24/19   1:41 PM
 WEEK 1 OPTION B REPRODUCIBLES
Informative (Expository) Checklist
Name: _________________________________________    My Topic: __________________________
My essay is  I have a central idea that answers the prompt.
organized.
 I organize my ideas in a logical order. 
 I connect my ideas so the reader can follow my 
thinking.
My essay is well  I find details and examples from all source articles.
supported. 
 I use details and examples to support my ideas.
 I choose details and examples that fit the topic.
My language  I choose my words carefully, and my tone is serious 
clear and precise. but friendly. 
 My sentences are complete (not fragments or run-
ons), and they are different lengths.
 I have used my best spelling, capitalization, and 
grammar.
AR34 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   34 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B REPRODUCIBLES
Graphic Organizer: Women’s Roles
Name: _________________________________________ My Topic: __________________________
Woman Role Secret or Public How people 
responded
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR35
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   35 10/24/19   1:41 PM
 WEEK 1 OPTION B REPRODUCIBLES
Graphic Organizer: Results of Innovation
Name: _________________________________________    My Topic: __________________________
Innovation Positive result Negative result
AR36 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   36 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B REPRODUCIBLES
Graphic Organizer: Characters
Name: _________________________________________ My Topic: __________________________
Characters Beginning Middle End
Details you can use
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR37
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   37 10/24/19   1:41 PM
 WEEK 1 OPTION B REPRODUCIBLES
Narrative Checklist
Name: _________________________________________    My Topic: __________________________
My narrative is well  My story includes characters and plot events from 
structured. the informational texts I read.
 The story has a clear beginning, middle, and end.
 The reader has enough information about setting 
to understand the story.
 People in the story are introduced and are 
mentioned because they are important to the story.
My narrative is  I use words and details that describe in a lively way.
descriptive. 
 I choose details that help the reader understand 
the characters and events.
 I include details from the informational texts I read.
My language is  I chose my words carefully. 
clear and precise.
 My sentences are complete (not fragments or run-
ons), and they are different lengths.
 I have used my best spelling, capitalization, and 
grammar.
AR38 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   38 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 1 OPTION B SAMPLE ESSAY
Sample Informative (Expository) Essay
PROMPT: Write an essay analyzing how innovations in technology had both 
positive and negative results. Use specific examples from all three articles to  
support your ideas.
 The Industrial Revolution led to the introduction of new technologies. The invention 
of the steam engine, new processes for making steel, and the cotton gin brought 
better and faster production. If you think it was all good, you’re wrong.  
 In 1850, William Kelly and Henry Bessemer invented a new process for making steel 
that cost less money and was faster than the old method. This development led to 
taller buildings, railroad tracks from one side of the country to the other, and cars. 
At first, cars were expensive and difficult to make. Then in 1913, Henry Ford changed 
how factories created cars. He developed the assembly line, a system for putting cars 
together that made them easier to build. When cars became cheaper, more people 
could afford them.  
James Watts invented a steam-powered engine in 1781. It allowed factories to make 
materials faster and in larger numbers. Products became easier for customers to buy. 
Thanks to the steam engine, John Fitch invented the steamboat in 1787, and Richard 
Trevithick developed the railway locomotive in 1804. Americans could transport 
goods faster. They could travel farther and faster by steamboat or railroad. They could 
move to different areas and create a new life. For others, life was hard. Steam power 
needed coal. 
 Another important development was Eli Whitney’s invention of the cotton gin in 
1794. Before the gin, plantations could clean one pound of cotton a day. After the 
gin, plantations could clean up to 50 pounds a day. Southern plantation owners now 
wanted to grow more cotton so that they could make more money. To do this, they 
needed more workers to plant and pick cotton. At the time, enslaved people worked 
in the fields. The number of men, women, and children forced to work in slavery 
increased from 700,000 to close to 4 million by 1860. 
 Innovations in technology during the Industrial Revolution changed the way 
Americans lived. The steam engine helped people and products move around the 
country faster. Steelmaking led to more buildings and cars. The cotton gin made 
cotton production easier. Unfortunately, some changes were super bad, and laborers 
lives were often hard. Overall, the development of technology during the Industrial 
Revolution brought both positive and negative changes to society.  
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR39
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   39 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 7 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Pecos Bill and the Tornado: A Tall Tale
(1) Pecos Bill was the roughest, toughest cowboy in the West. (2) When Bill 
was just a baby, he tumbled out of his parents’ covered wagon and landed 
smack-dab in the middle of West Texas. (3) Luckily for Bill, a pack of coyotes 
found him and raised him as their own. (4) After that experience, nothing 
scared Pecos Bill—and no adventure was too outlandish! 
(5) By the time he was ten, Pecos Bill had tamed wild horses and ridden 
bareback on a mountain lion. (6) What would he do next? (7) Why, he’d ride 
a huge whirling tornado, that’s what! (8) The West was in the middle of a 
terrible drought. (9) In fact, the area was so devoid of moisture, livestock were 
dehydrating and blowing around like big brown tumbleweeds! (10) So, when a 
ferocious tornado rumbled into the area, Bill jumped at the opportunity to end 
the drought.  
(11) “I’ll catch that noisy twister and squeeze the water out of it,” Bill vowed. 
(12) Quick as lightning, Bill grabbed his lasso, roped the rotating spout, 
and hoisted himself onto it with a joyful whoop. (13) The tornado bucked 
like a bronco and growled louder than the meanest mountain lion, but 
Bill just sat back and enjoyed the ride. (14) In case you don’t know much 
about him, I’ll tell you: he was extremely tall and loud. (15) As Bill rode the 
tornado across Texas, New Mexico, and Arizona, he used his powerful hands 
to squeeze water from it. (16) The water showered down on the parched soil, 
and everyone cheered. (17) Finally, the tornado ran out of steam and dumped 
Bill in California. (18) But when Bill fell from the sky, he hit the ground so hard 
he made an enormous dent. (19) Today, we call that great depression Death 
Valley. 
GO ON
AR40 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   40 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 7 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Pecos Bill and the Tornado: A Tall Tale (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1. Find the best place to add this sentence: 
 Bill’s parents didn’t realize he was gone until it was too late.  
 A After sentence 2
 B After sentence 10
 C After sentence 11
 D After sentence 16
2. Choose the best sentence to delete:  
 A Sentence 6
 B Sentence 8
 C Sentence 11
 D Sentence 14
3.  Add a transition to the beginning of sentence 8 that best fits the meaning: 
 A Finally
 B And yet
 C After that
 D Back then
4.  Which sentence makes the best ending? 
 A If you see a tornado, run!
 B It’s the lowest place in the entire Western Hemisphere! 
 C Pecos Bill was not afraid of coyotes, that’s for sure!
 D A covered wagon is no place for a baby!    
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR41
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   41 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 7 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
The Mural
(1) Camp Sky Rock buzzed with campers’ voices as they discussed their 
ideas for a mural. (2) It seemed as if everyone was talking at once—everyone, 
that is, except Caleb, who sat quietly against the wall sketching in his 
notebook. 
(3) “The theme is cooperation,” said Michael, “so, maybe, the mural should 
show our rowing teams. (4) Rowing is all about teamwork!” (5) There were 
murmurs of agreement. (6) Caleb sketched a scene of three campers putting 
their boat into the river. (7) Back home, he had two sisters, two cats, and a dog. 
(8) “Good point,” said Arno, “but don’t forget rock climbing! (9) We learned 
lots of skills—cooperation, patience, communication. (10) Since we all climbed 
Mount Sky Rock, and our camp is named for it, I think that would make a great 
mural!” (11) Caleb added a scene to his sketch showing a trio of campers 
reaching the summit of Mount Sky Rock, their arms raised in victory. (12) 
Others began offering their own thoughts of what would best capture the 
theme: swimming relays, woodworking, and organic gardening. (13) No sooner 
was an idea called out than Caleb added it to his ever-growing sketch. (14) 
Kai glanced down at the notebook and shouted, “Wow, Caleb, that’s awesome! 
(15) Hey, guys, look at this! (16) This should be our mural!”  
(17) The campers set up teams to make it happen. (18) Caleb made the 
sketch on large, mural-sized paper, and each boy signed up for the part of the 
mural he wanted to paint. (19) Unnoticed, their counselor, Stan, used his cell 
phone to take a photo of them at work. (20) When the painting was finished, 
Stan handed them a printout of the photo. 
GO ON
AR42 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   42 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 7 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
The Mural (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1.  Find the best place to add this sentence: 
 There were shouts of “yeah” and “good idea!”
 A After sentence 2
 B After sentence 8
 C After sentence 11
 D After sentence 16
2. Choose the best sentence to delete: 
 A Sentence 2
 B Sentence 7 
 C Sentence 12
 D Sentence 16
3.  Add a transition to the beginning of sentence 17 that best fits the meaning: 
 A All of a sudden
 B Soon
 C Finally
 D  Naturally
4.  Which sentence makes the best ending? 
 A  “Let’s go to dinner now,” he said, leading the Camp Sky Rock campers 
toward the dining hall. “It’s late!”  
 B “Thanks for taking our picture!” Caleb said to Stan. “Can I keep this copy?”
 C  “Talk about cooperation—these are great examples!” he said, pointing to 
the mural and the kids in the photo. “Outstanding!”
 D  “When do we get to go swimming?” Michael asked. “We didn’t get a 
chance while we were working on the mural.”  
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR43
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   43 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 8 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Corn Palace
(1) Many palaces around the world have been built for kings and queens. 
(2) However, there’s only one palace that was built to celebrate corn. (3) 
Located in Mitchell, South Dakota, the middle of America, it’s the one and only 
Corn Palace. 
(4) The Corn Palace looks like a Russian castle. (5) Inside and out, it’s 
decorated with large, colorful murals made of corn, grain, and grass. (6) At first 
glance, the murals look like mosaics made of small tiles. (7) On inspection, you 
see that they’re made of different colored corn kernels! 
(8) All the corn used in these incredible murals is grown by local farmers. 
(9) They plant corn in a variety of colors. (10) Including several shades of red 
and brown, as well as blue, white, black, orange, and green. 
(11) About 500,000 people visit the Corn Palace each year to see 
the unforgettable artwork. (12) The best time to visit is between May and 
September. (13) Once winter starts, local birds begin to nibble on the murals. 
(14) That’s when the Corn Palace is also called the World’s Largest Bird Feeder! 
GO ON
AR44 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   44 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 8 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Corn Palace (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1.  Which of the following is a fragment?
 A   Located in Mitchell, South Dakota, the middle of America, it’s the one and only  
Corn Palace.
 B   The Corn Palace looks like a Russian castle.
 C   Including several shades of red and brown, as well as blue, white black, orange,  
and green.
 D  That’s when the Corn Palace is also called the World’s Largest Bird Feeder! 
2. What’s the best way to edit sentence 7 to include an adjective?
 A On close inspection, you see that they’re made of different colored corn kernels!
 B  On closer inspection, you see that they’re made of different colored corn kernels!
 C On closest inspection, you see that they’re made of different colored corn kernels!
 D On most close inspection, you see that they’re made of different colored corn kernels!
3.  What’s the best way to add an indefinite pronoun to sentence 12?
 A The best time for someone to visit is between May and September.
 B  The best time to visit somewhere is between May and September.
 C  The best time to visit is between May and September everywhere.
 D Everyone, the best time to visit is between May and September.
4.  What’s the best way to combine sentences 12 and 13?
 A  Although the best time to visit is between May and September, once winter  
starts, local birds begin to nibble on the murals.
 B  The best time to visit is between May and September, unless once winter starts,  
local birds begin to nibble on the murals.  
 C  The best time to visit is between May and September, once winter starts, since  
local birds begin to nibble on the murals.
 D  The best time to visit is between May and September, because once winter  
starts, local birds begin to nibble on the murals. STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR45
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   45 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 8 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Popcorn Chemistry
(1) It’s light, crunchy, and fun to eat. (2) You can buy it at the movies or 
make it at home. (3) Few snacks are more popular than popcorn, but have 
you ever wondered about the chemistry of this culinary delight? (4) What 
happens when popcorn pops, and just how do dry kernels change into the 
fluffy treat we love? 
(5) Popcorn is different from the regular sweet corn we enjoy at meals, it is 
a type of corn that is grown especially for popping. (6) Each popcorn kernel 
has a hard shell, or hull, with starch inside. (7) You might not think of a popcorn 
kernel as moist but each kernel holds a tiny bit of water. (8) When you heat 
a popcorn kernel, the water inside begins to expand. (9) The hull holds in the 
moisture until its expansion causes a tiny explosion to occur. (10) Pop! (11) 
The hull breaks. (12) Phsst! (13) Steam is released. (14) The starch inside the 
kernel has turned to jellylike goo that inflates and spills out. (15) The result is 
the irregularly shaped snack we call popcorn. 
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1.  What’s the best way to edit the run-on in sentence 5?
 A   Popcorn is different. From the regular sweet corn we enjoy at meals, it is a 
type of corn that is grown especially for popping.
 B   Popcorn is different from the regular sweet corn. We enjoy at meals, it is a 
type of corn that is grown especially for popping.
 C   Popcorn is different from the regular sweet corn we enjoy at meals. It is a 
type of corn that is grown especially for popping.
 D   Popcorn is different from the regular sweet corn we enjoy at meals, it is a 
type of corn that is grown. Especially for popping.
GO ON
AR46 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   46 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 8 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Popcorn Chemistry (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS (continued)
2. What’s the best way to edit sentence 4 to include an indefinite pronoun?
 A  What happens when popcorn pops, and just how do dry kernels of corn 
change into the fluffy treat many love? 
 B   What happens when popcorn pops, and just how do dry kernels of corn 
changes into the fluffy treat several love? 
 C  What happens when popcorn pops, and just how do dry kernels of corn 
changed into the fluffy treat someone loves? 
 D   What happens when popcorn pops, and just how do dry kernels of corn 
changing into the fluffy treat everybody loves? 
3.  What’s the best way to punctuate sentence 7? 
 A  You might not think of a popcorn kernel as moist but each kernel holds a 
tiny bit, of water.
 B  You might not think of a popcorn kernel as moist, but each kernel holds a 
tiny bit of water.
 C  You might not think of a popcorn kernel, as moist but each kernel holds a 
tiny bit of water.
 D The sentence is correct the way it is.
4.  What’s the best way to combine sentences 14 and 15?
 A  The starch inside the kernel has turned to jellylike goo that inflates and spills 
out, even though the result is the irregularly shaped snack we call popcorn. 
 B  Before the starch inside the kernel has turned to jellylike goo that inflates 
and spills out, the result is the irregularly shaped snack we call popcorn.   
 C  After the starch inside the kernel has turned to jellylike goo that inflates and 
spills out, the result is the irregularly shaped snack we call popcorn.
 D  The starch inside the kernel has turned to jellylike goo that inflates and spills 
out because the result is the irregularly shaped snack we call popcorn.
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR47
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   47 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 9 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Young Patriots 
(1) Much has been written about the leaders of the American Revolution. 
(2) Yet many young people also participated in the events of the time, 
demonstrating bravery in their own way. (3) In 1776, young Joseph Plumb 
Martin knew he wanted to join the army and fight for freedom. (4) Although 
he was only fifteen, he was eager to enlist. (5) Joseph first joined a state 
militia. (6) Then he enlisted in the Continental Army. (7) Joseph served as a 
Continental soldier through almost the whole war. (8) Later when he was much 
older, he published a book telling about his courageous adventures. 
(9) Bravery is also a necessity for any young man who accepted the 
assignment of drummer. (10) A drummer’s duty was to beat out rhythms to 
help direct troops during battle. (11) A sure sign of a drummer’s courage 
was his ability to play while guns fired around him. (12) Drummers, who were 
sometimes younger than eighteen, were often joined by either fifers or buglers. 
(13) These young musicians were important on the battlefield and at camp. 
(14) Their tunes provided a marching beat and boosted morale. (15) Their 
music also let soldiers know when it was time to wake, eat, and go to bed. 
GO ON
AR48 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   48 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 9 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Young Patriots (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1.  Which form of the perfect tense is used in sentence 1?
 A   present perfect 
 B   past perfect
 C   future perfect
 D none of the above 
2.  Which sentence is the correct way to write sentence 2 with a correlative 
conjunction?
 A  Either adults or many young people participated in the events of the time, 
demonstrating their bravery in their own way.
 B   Not only adults but many young people also participated in the events of 
the time, demonstrating their bravery in their own way. 
 C  Not only adults but many young people participated in the events of the 
time, demonstrating their bravery in their own way.
 D  Not only adults but also many young people participated in the events of 
the time, demonstrating their bravery in their own way. 
3.  Which sentence contains a shift in verb tense? 
 A sentence 3
 B  sentence 6
 C  sentence 9
 D sentence 12
4.  What is the correct way to write sentence 14? 
 A  Their tunes provide a marching beat and boost morale.
 B  Their tunes provided a marching beat and boost morale.
 C Their tunes provide a marching beat and boosted morale.
 D The sentence is correct the way it is.
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR49
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   49 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 9 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Samuel Morse: Inventor and Artist
(1) Samuel Morse is credited with inventing the electric telegraph and 
its code of dots and dashes. (2) That alone is an amazing feat! (3) However, 
before becoming an inventor, Morse was an accomplished artist.  
(4) While attending college, Morse became interested in drawing and 
made extra money by doing portraits of his classmates. (5) After graduation, 
he went to Europe and studied art for three years. (6) When he returns home 
to Boston, he travels from town to town, painting portraits of anyone who would 
hire him.  
(7) It was difficult for Morse to earn a decent living. (8) When he married 
and had children, he continued to struggle. (9) However, over time, his 
reputation grew. (10) In 1816, he painted portraits of presidents James Monroe 
and John Adams. (11) Later, he did a portrait of the members of the House of 
Representatives, as well. (12) Of course, Morse continued traveling for his work 
and, as a result, missed his family dearly.    
(13) In 1825, while working in Washington, D.C., Morse received a letter 
from his father. (14) The letter, which had taken weeks to arrive, stated that 
Samuel’s wife were ill. (15) Morse rushed home, but when he arrived, his wife 
had already died. (16) Many believe that her death inspired him to create an 
invention that could send messages quickly and without delay.   
(17) In 1832, Morse conceived of the idea of an electric telegraph. 
(18) However, it wasn’t until 1844 that the first official demonstration of the 
telegraph took place with a message sent from Washington, D.C., to Baltimore. 
(19) Soon, telegraph wires were built across America and then in countries 
across the world. (20) Thanks to Samuel Morse, important messages could be 
sent in seconds, instead of weeks or months.  
GO ON
AR50 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   50 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 SESSION 9 PASSAGES AND QUESTIONS
Samuel Morse: Inventor and Artist (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1.  Which sentence contains a shift in verb tense?
 A  sentence 4
 B  sentence 6
 C  sentence 8
 D sentence 12 
2. What is the correct way to write sentence 14?
 A The letter, which had taken weeks to arrive, stated that Samuel’s wife was ill.
 B  The letter, which has taken weeks to arrive, stated that Samuel’s wife were ill.
 C The letter, which has taken weeks to arrive, stated that Samuel’s wife was ill.
 D The sentence is correct the way it is.
3.  What form of the perfect tense is used in sentence 15?
 A present perfect
 B  past perfect
 C  future perfect
 D none of the above
4.   Which sentence is the correct way to write sentence 19 with a correlative 
conjunction?
 A  Telegraph wires were built not only across America but also countries 
across the world had them too.
 B  Telegraph wires were built not only across America but also in countries 
across the world.
 C  Telegraph wires were not only built across America but also in countries 
across the world.
 D  Not only were telegraph wires built across America but also in countries 
across the world. 
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR51
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   51 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Prompt: Option A
READ the information in the box below.
Some people believe that pride will lead to a person’s 
downfall. Other people think that we should always 
take pride in what we do well.
THINK about the role that pride should play in a person’s life.
WRITE about whether you think pride is a negative or positive trait in a 
person. Explain your thinking. 
Be sure to:
• clearly state your central idea
• organize your writing
• develop your ideas with details
• choose your words carefully
• use all you know about spelling, punctuation, and capitalization.
STOP
AR52 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   52 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Prompt: Option B
DIRECTIONS: Read the articles “Mining for Gold,”  “History of Gold,” and 
“California’s Gold Rush.” Think about key details in each article that show why 
gold is valuable. 
Write an essay explaining why people have considered gold valuable, and 
analyze how people throughout history have tried to turn its value into personal 
wealth. Use details and examples from all of the articles to support your ideas.
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR53
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   53 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
Mining for Gold
Gold has various scientific properties that make it desirable as a metal. Its 
yellow color, luster, and shine make the metal look as valuable as it is. This shows 
in its scientific name. The atomic symbol for gold, Au, comes from the Latin word 
aurum meaning “shining dawn.” Gold is soft enough to be shaped, which makes 
is useful for making jewelry. Gold is also a stable metal. It does not easily combine 
with other elements. It also does not corrode or rust like other metals. Gold is not 
affected by water or oxygen in the air. Gold can last for years at the bottom of the 
ocean. Gold does not tarnish or lose its shine easily. All of these aspects of gold 
make it valuable for humans to use in a variety of ways. 
You can find tiny amounts of gold in almost all rocks and soil. Even seawater 
has some gold dissolved in it. But it is not easy to recover or extract that gold. 
Most gold is found within Earth’s crust. The crust is the planet’s rocky outer layer. 
This layer includes the ground you walk on, the mountains, the river bottoms, 
and the ocean floor. Scientists have several theories on why gold is found there. 
Underneath Earth’s crust is a layer that is 1,700 miles (2,736 kilometers) thick. This 
layer is called the mantle. The mantle is very hot, ranging from 1,600°F (871°C) 
to 6,700°F (3,704°C). The mantle is made of melted rock, called magma. Just like 
everything in the universe, magma is made of different elements, including gold. 
Some scientists believe that when magma pushes upward, it can seep through 
cracks in Earth’s crust. The liquid gold is part of the magma. As magma climbs up 
the cooler rocky crust, it begins to harden into solid rock. Gold does not combine 
easily with the other elements in the magma. Instead, the gold combines only 
with other gold during the cooling process. Other scientists have another theory 
about how gold got into the ground. They believe that rain plays a role in bringing 
gold up from deep below the crust. Rain seeps through cracks in Earth’s crust. 
As the water travels downward, it reaches areas of the crust that are very hot. 
The water boils in these areas. The boiling water dissolves metals, including gold. 
Gold is then released from the surrounding rock. Over time, some of the water and 
dissolved metals push upward through cracks in the crust. As it nears the cooler 
surface, gold separates from the water. The yellow metal cools in rocky cracks, 
forming vein-like lines of gold. 
GO ON
AR54 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   54 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
Mining for Gold
Regardless of how gold comes to the earth’s surface, mining for gold can be 
very difficult. Sometimes, gold miners have to dig up as many as 13 metric tons of 
rock to extract 1 ounce (28 grams) of gold. It takes a lot of hard work to find and 
mine this valuable metal. First, geologists survey an area of land to find where 
gold is. They take samples of the rocks and minerals in the surveyed area. Then, 
they analyze the chemical composition of the rocks. They use their findings to 
map out where the gold is. Once they have located the gold, it can be mined. 
Miners reach the gold by digging underground tunnels or large open pits. Then, 
they insert explosives into the rock to blast it into pieces. After that, the miners haul 
the rock pieces to the surface for sorting. Miners pick out rocks that bear any bit 
of gold. 
But the work is not done yet. The gold must be extracted from the rocks. Gold 
mining companies use many techniques to extract gold from its ore. There are a 
number of ways to extract gold. One method involves treating the rocks with a 
solution that contains cyanide, a chemical. Gold is usually not reactive. But when 
it comes into contact with cyanide, the metal dissolves. The solution, now filled 
with gold, drains out of the rocks. What follows is a series of chemical processes 
to remove the gold from the cyanide solution. The extracted gold goes through a 
refining process to remove impurities. Then, it becomes cleaned pure gold. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR55
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   55 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
History of Gold
Gold Funerary Mask of King Tut
People have valued gold for a long time. Most historians think that gold was 
first discovered over 5,000 years ago. Scientists suspect that gold was the first 
metal used by humans. People probably spotted gold shining in the sunlight. 
When moving water, such as a river, passes through a lode deposit, the rock 
erodes. As the rock wears away, the gold particles inside the rock become 
exposed. The river washes the gold particles downstream. Some of the gold 
particles get stuck in sandy riverbeds. In ancient civilizations, people scooped up 
the sandy river deposits and washed them through sheepskin. The woolly fibers in 
the fleece trapped the gold particles. The fleece was then dried and thrown into a 
fire. What remained once the fire was out were tiny globs of melted gold.  
In ancient civilizations like Egypt and Greece, gold became used in artistic, 
economic, and spiritual ways. Because gold is malleable and shiny, it is ideal for 
shaping into various brooches, rings, bracelets, and earrings. Romans placed 
various gemstones in gold. This fashion continued into the Byzantine era with 
gemstones and also pearls. In 8th century BCE, gold began to be used as 
currency as well. King Croesus of Lydia in Asia Minor was the first to use solid 
gold coins as money. Greek and Roman empires also used gold along with silver 
as coinage. One of the most famous gold coins is the Roman bezant. Emperor 
Constantine introduced and used the currency from 4th to 12th century CE. Gold 
was also ideal for creating religious artifacts. Its value and visual beauty were 
used for objects like crowns, scepters, statues, and other offerings. In the Inca 
empire, gold was thought to be the sweat of the sun god. Therefore, people used 
gold to make various masks and sun disks to honor the sun god.
GO ON
AR56 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   56 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
History of Gold
During the 1500s, many European countries sent ships out to explore. The ships 
went to seek the three G’s: God, Glory, and Gold. Nations like Spain, Portugal, 
England voyaged to North and South America to find gold. They looked for 
mythical sources such as the lost city of El Dorado. In 1519, Spanish explorer 
Hernando de Cortéz sailed to Mexico. The Aztec empire was rich with gold. Cortéz 
and his men conquered the Aztec and stole their gold. Cortéz had the gold 
melted down and turned into gold bars. The Spanish empire became very rich 
from this gold. Gold became so precious that people began to wonder if they 
could turn other metals into gold. 
Some of the earliest scientists searched for ways to turn common metals, such 
as lead, into gold. This study was called alchemy. People then believed that four 
elements made up everything on Earth. The four elements were earth, air, fire, 
and water. Alchemists thought that they could change one element into another. 
They hoped to change lead into gold. In the 1700s, scientists began to discover 
the structure and properties of elements. They soon realized that they could not 
change a metal into gold. Alchemy slowly died out. 
Today, gold is still considered a valuable and useful metal. Gold is not reactive, 
so it does not corrode. That’s why dentists use gold to fill cavities. Gold is also 
reflective. It can help protect astronauts from solar radiation. In addition, like all 
metals, gold conducts electricity. That helps make it a valuable material to use in 
modern technology, such as in computer chips. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR57
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   57 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
California’s Gold Rush
The years from 1849 to 1900 were a time of great gold rushes in the United 
States. A gold rush is a sudden movement of a large number of people to 
a place where gold has been found. Men and women left their homes and 
traveled hundreds, sometimes even thousands, of miles to get to the gold fields. 
People will trek thousands of mile for the promise of finding gold, because it is 
so highly valued. There isn’t much of it, and is rare and hard to find. The people 
looking for gold were called prospectors. A prospector’s dream was to “strike it 
rich,” or find lots of gold. Some prospectors did strike it rich, but most did not. They 
worked long and hard for very little return. Often the people who really struck it 
rich during gold rushes were not miners. They were the people who made the 
equipment that the miners used. They were store owners who sold goods and 
supplies to prospectors at high prices.  
Johann Sutter was a Swiss immigrant who built his home on land that is 
today Sacramento. His owned vast acres of farmland and as many buildings as 
a small town. James Marshall was one of Sutter’s employees. In January 1848, 
he discovered gold while building a sawmill for Sutter on the American River. For 
quite a while, the discovery was kept a secret. Then, in the spring, a man named 
Sam Brannan let the secret out. He went through the streets shouting, “Gold! 
Gold!” Nearly everyone rushed off in search of gold. The rest of the country knew 
nothing about it. News did not travel fast or easily at that time. There were no 
telegraph lines. There was no railroad that linked California with the rest of the 
country. Ships traveling from the West Coast to the East Coast took six months 
to get around the southern tip of South America. In December 1848, President 
James Polk assured the country that there really was gold in California. The rush 
was on. People from all over headed to California, hoping to strike it rich.
GO ON
AR58 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   58 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
California’s Gold Rush
Gold seekers coming from the East Coast had a choice of three routes, none 
of them easy. They could sail by ship around South America. That journey took 
about six months and included the dangerous passage around Cape Horn, at 
the southern tip of South America. There the weather was stormy and the sea was 
very rough. They could sail by ship to Panama. Then they had to cross Panama. 
They made the crossing partly by canoe, partly by mule or horse, and partly on 
foot. When they reached the Pacific Ocean, they waited for a ship to take them to 
San Francisco. This route might take as little as eight weeks, but there was great 
danger of disease They could travel by land across the prairies and mountains 
of the United States. If they were lucky, there would be trails they could follow to 
the California Trail, which was a major trail west. Native Americans along the way 
often helped the gold seekers find food. However, the disease cholera killed many 
of those who took the land routes. When gold was discovered, there were about 
14,000 settlers in California. By the end of 1849, there were almost 100,000. In three 
more years, the population grew to about 250,000. 
During that time, the average worker in the East might make $1 a day. A fairly 
good—and lucky—gold miner in California might make $8 a day. But the gold 
miner had to contend with a high cost of living. As people poured into California, 
prices for food and supplies increased. A worker in New York could buy a loaf 
of bread for 4 cents. The California miner had to pay 75 cents. Eggs cost $1 to 
$3 each. Apples sold for $1 to $5 each. Most of the miners hoped to find gold 
by a method called placer mining. The name comes from a Spanish word for 
“sand bank.” Placer miners looked for bits of gold that had washed out of deep 
underground deposits. They often looked in the sandy bottoms and banks of 
rivers and streams. Placer mining was hard work, but it didn’t require a lot of costly 
equipment. A person could wash sand in a pan, looking for the flecks of gold that 
might be hidden in it. This was called panning for gold. A more efficient method 
was to pour water over sand in a cradle, a wooden box mounted on rockers. 
When the cradle was rocked, the gold fell to the bottom. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR59
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   59 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Writing Task: Option B (continued)
California’s Gold Rush
By the end of 1849, most of the easy-to-find gold was gone. However, people 
kept coming to California in search of gold. Life in the mining camps became 
dangerous. Those who had not struck it rich often blamed their failure on others. 
Fights broke out between people of different races or ethnic groups. Disease, 
starvation, accidents, and violence killed many miners and drove many more 
back home. By 1852, the boom was over. Not many miners had made their 
fortunes. Placer mining worked for only a few. Most of the gold was deep in the 
ground. Only people with the money to buy expensive mining equipment and 
hire many miners could find it and dig it out. The most important and most lasting 
effect of the gold rush of 1849 was that it made California famous around the 
world. People now thought of California as a place to strike it rich, one way or 
another. They continued to arrive, seeking a better life.  
The gold rushes brought thousands of people to the places where gold had 
been discovered. People gave up their jobs to try their luck in the hunt for gold. 
The people hoping to strike it rich often left their families behind. They planned to 
bring their riches home to their families. However, many who came to California, 
Colorado, Nevada, and Alaska in search of gold stayed. Instead of returning to 
their families, they brought their families to them. In doing so, they turned mining 
camps into settled towns. The gold rushes were important and exciting episodes 
in U.S. history. Lured by the prospect of getting rich quickly and easily, and 
encouraged by a spirit of courage and adventure, the gold seekers ventured forth 
by the thousands.
STOP
AR60 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_AR_W2_PracticeTest.indd   60 10/24/19   2:51 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Revising and Editing
DIRECTIONS: Read the selections and choose the best answer to each question. 
Coming to America 
(1) “We’re coming into New York Harbor!”  
(2) Fifteen-year-old Annie perked up at her brother’s words. (3) The voyage 
by steamship from Ireland to the United States had been long and difficult. (4) 
That day in January 1892 was bitter and cold, and Annie and her two brothers 
rushed to the deck. 
(5) Annie thought of her parents back home, and tears came to her eyes. 
(6) They had scraped together enough money for the three oldest children to 
make this journey to America, the land of opportunity. (7) Annie shuddered to 
think of all those thousands of people in Ireland who had perished when the 
crops failed and famine struck. (8) She were one of the lucky ones, and she 
felt grateful, nervous, and excited all at the same time. 
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR61
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   61 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Revising and Editing (continued)
Medal of Honor 
(9) In 1963, President John F. Kennedy established the Presidential Medal 
of Freedom. (10) He wanted to pay tribute to men and women who promoted 
peace and upheld the Constitution. (11) Individuals would be honored for 
their contributions to the arts as well. 
(12) President Kennedy did not live to see the first awards ceremony 
held later that year. (13) President Lyndon Johnson awarded more than 
thirty medals to accomplished artists, teachers, and politicians. (14) He also 
recognized President Kennedy as a worthy recipient. 
(15) The singer Marian Anderson was among the first to receive the 
Presidential Medal of Freedom. (16) In 1939, Anderson had been denied an 
opportunity to perform at Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C., because of her 
race. (17) First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt was outraged. (18) People considered 
Roosevelt to be very tall. (19) She invited Anderson to give a special concert at 
the Lincoln Memorial. (20) More than 75,000 people attended. (21) The event 
raised awareness about racial discrimination. 
GO ON
AR62 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   62 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Revising and Editing (continued)
PRACTICE QUESTIONS 
1.  Where’s the best place to add this sentence?
 They gaped at the welcoming Statue of Liberty.
 A   after sentence 3  
 B   after sentence 4 
 C   after sentence 6 
 D  after sentence 7  
2. Which form of the perfect tense is used in sentence 7? 
 A present perfect  
 B  past perfect 
 C future perfect 
 D none of the above  
3.   How can you write sentence 4 with a subordinating conjunction? 
 A  Even though that day in January 1892 was bitter and cold, Annie and her 
two brothers rushed to the deck. 
 B  That day in January 1892 was bitter and cold, so Annie and her two 
brothers rushed to the deck. 
 C  That day in January 1892 was bitter and cold; Annie and her two brothers 
rushed to the deck.  
 D  That day in January 1892 was bitter and cold when Annie and her two 
brothers rushed to the deck.
GO ON
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR63
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   63 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Revising and Editing (continued)
4.  Which sentence contains a shift in verb tense? 
 A sentence 1 
 B  sentence 4
 C  sentence 5 
 D sentence 8 
5.  Which correction should be made to sentence 8?
 A  She were one of the lucky ones, and she feel grateful, nervous, and excited 
all at the same time. 
 B  She were one of the lucky ones, and she feels grateful, nervous, and excited 
all at the same time. 
 C  She was one of the lucky ones, and she felt grateful, nervous, and excited all 
at the same time. 
 D  The sentence is correct as is.
6.  What is the best way to include an indefinite pronoun in sentence 11?
 A  Others would be honored for their contributions to the arts.
 B  Individuals would be honored for their contributions to the arts somewhere.
 C Everyone would be honored for their contributions to the arts as well.
 D Everybody would be honored for their contributions to the arts as well.
7.  Add a transition to the beginning of sentence 13 that best fits the meaning:  
 A   At the last minute 
 B  Finally 
 C   Next 
 D In his place 
GO ON
AR64 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   64 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 PRACTICE TEST
Revising and Editing (continued)
8. Which sentence should you delete?
 A sentence 9
 B  sentence 13
 C sentence 16
 D sentence 18
9.  Which is the best way to combine sentences 20 and 21?
 A  Even though more than 75,000 people attended, the event raised 
awareness about racial discrimination.
 B  More than 75,000 people attended, even though the event raised 
awareness about racial discrimination. 
 C  The event raised awareness about racial discrimination even though more 
than 75,000 people attended.
 D  Because more than 75,000 people attended, the event raised awareness 
about racial discrimination. 
10. What is the best way to end “Medal of Honor”?
 A  Since then, more than 500 people have received the medal. 
 B  Eleanor Roosevelt’s husband was the 32nd president.
 C  The medal is important for other reasons too.
 D President Johnson was president in the 1960s.
STOP
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR65
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   65 10/24/19   1:41 PM
WEEK 2 ANSWER KEY
SESSION 7: PECOS BILL AND THE SESSION 9: YOUNG PATRIOTS
TORNADO: A TALL TALE  1.  A
 1.  A  2.  D
 2.  D  3.  C
 3.  D  4.  D
 4.  B
SESSION 9: SAMUEL MORSE: INVENTOR 
SESSION 7: THE MURAL AND ARTIST
 1.  B  1.  B
 2.  B  2.  A
 3.  A  3.  B
 4.  C  4.  B
SESSION 8: CORN PALACE REVISING AND EDITING PRACTICE TEST
 1.  C COMING TO AMERICA AND MEDAL OF 
 2.  B HONOR
 3.  A  1.  B
 4.  D  2.  B
 3.  A
SESSION 8: POPCORN CHEMISTRY  4.  C
1. C  5.  C
2. D  6.  A
3. B  7.  D
4. C  8.  D
 9.  D
 10.  A
AR66 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   66 10/24/19   1:41 PM
Dear Caregivers and Families,
In our next Writer’s Workshop unit, we will briefly take a look back at what we’ve 
learned so far about essay-writing and reflect on how we can apply these skills 
and strategies during written assessments. In this unit, we will analyze typical 
writing prompts and tasks and will practice planning, writing, and revising 
different types of essays in our sessions. 
This is an opportunity for young writers to continue to hone their writing skills, 
while also becoming comfortable with the types of thinking they will have to 
do independently in a classroom test-taking environment. By practicing this in 
advance, they will be more confident and at ease whenever they are asked to 
write about what they know.
Please help us to make this unit fun and meaningful for all. Here is what you 
can do:
•  Encourage your student to explain her or his thinking when they make a 
choice about something (food to eat, a movie to watch, a game to play). Ask 
her or him to give reasons for the choice and to support these reasons with 
an example or two. 
• Create a new ending for a story in a book or a movie with your student. 
• Use details from the story that would support this alternate ending. 
•  Calmly practice doing things that are timed. Help your student learn to work 
quickly without feeling rushed or panicked.
•  Make a game of finding errors in writing. You can find them everywhere—in 
signs, on flyers, and online.
We look forward to continuing our exploration of writing together and thank 
you for your support! 
Sincerely, 
The Grade 5 Team
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR67
Y42185_AR PAGES_1_BOTH.indb   67 10/24/19   1:41 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal: Writers read instructions closely.
Strategy:  Breaking the Prompt Down Strategy:  Reading the Prompt Before 
into Steps Reading the Passage
1.	 Reread	the	writing	prompt,	sentence	 1.	 Identify	the	materials	you’ll	need	to	
by	sentence.	 complete	the	writing	assessment,	
2.	Find	the	first	thing	you	have	to	do	in	 including	writing	prompt,	articles,	and	
your	writing.	Jot	this	first	step	down. writing	tools.
3.	Find	the	second	thing	you	will	have	to	 2.	Read	the	writing	prompt	first	to	get	a	
do.	Jot	this	second	step	down. good	idea	of	what	the	writing	task	is.
4.	Do	the	same	for	the	third	and	fourth	 3.	Ask	questions	to	clarify	any	points	in	
steps. the	prompt	that	are	confusing.
5.	Keep	these	steps	as	a	checklist	of	to- 4.	Begin	reading	the	articles,	keeping	in	
dos	as	you	plan	your	writing. mind	what	it	is	that	the	writing	prompt	
will	require	you	to	do.
Strategy:  Rereading the Prompt
1.	 After	you	finish	your	draft,	read	the	
prompt	one	more	time.
2.	Notice	everything	the	prompt	asks	
forand	put	a	check	next	to	each	thing	
you	completed.
3.	If	any	is	left	without	a	check,	go	
back	to	your	draft	and	make	some	
changes.
AR68 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   68 10/24/19   12:50 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal: Writers analyze any texts that are provided.
Strategy:  Citing Text-Based Evidence Strategy:  Using Graphic Organizers to 
1.	 Think	about	the	information	you	put	 Collect Story Details
into	your	chart. 1.	 Think	about	what	the	prompt	is	asking.
2.	Find	the	exact	wording	in	the	article. 2.	Look	at	how	you	marked	up	the	story.
3.	Add	a	quote	from	the	article	into	your	 3.	Use	a	chart	or	design	another	
essay.	Use	quotation	marks	around	 organizer	to	collect	the	information	you	
the	words	that	come	from	the	text.	If	 need.
there	is	no	author	to	cite,	you	can	cite	
the	title	of	the	article.
Strategy:  Identifying an Off-Topic 
Sentence
Strategy:  Putting Ideas Into Your Own 1.	 Think	about	the	purpose	of	the	
Words passage.	The	purpose	is	what	the	
1.	 Unless	you	are	quoting	the	article,	you	 author	is	trying	to	do.
will	need	to	put	ideas	into	your	own	 2.	Think	about	whether	this	sentence	
words. helps	the	author	achieve	the	purpose.
2.	Ask	yourself: 3.	If	the	sentence	has	information	
•	How	would	I	explain	or	retell	this	idea	 that	takes	the	reader	away	from	
to	a	friend? the	author’s	purpose,	then	it	doesn’t	
•	How	can	I	put	two	ideas	together? belong.
•	How	can	I	add	some	of	my	own	
thinking	to	an	idea?
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR69
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   69 10/24/19   12:50 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal:  Writers use their best spelling, 
 punctuation, and grammar.
Strategy:  Editing Section-by-Section Strategy:  Editing Sentences on an 
1.	 Begin	with	the	first	paragraph	or	 Assessment
section	of	your	writing. 1.	 Read	the	passage.	Then,	read	the	
2.	Read	through	this	section	to	find	any	 question	and	restate	what	it	is	asking	
spelling	changes	you’d	like	to	make. you	to	do.
3.	Go	back	and	review	to	find	any	 2.	Look	at	the	choices	and	try	them	out	
punctuation	changes. with	the	passage.	
4.	Go	back	and	review	to	find	any	 3.	Decide	which	answer	choice	makes	
capitalization	changes. the	most	sense.
5.	Repeat	these	steps	with	the	next	
section	of	your	writing. Strategy:  Checking Punctuation
1.	 Think	about	all	you	know	about	
punctuation.
Strategy:  Finding Your Own Mistakes
1.	 Check	the	beginning	of	every	 2.	Start	by	reviewing	your	piece	for	end	
sentence	for	a	capital	letter. punctuation.	Check	for	the	correct	
use	of	periods,	question	marks,	and	
2.	Check	the	end	of	every	sentence	for	 exclamation	points.
punctuation.
3.	Next,	check	to	make	sure	the	
3.	Check	every	sentence	for	a	subject,	a	 punctuation	inside	your	sentences	is	
verb,	and	a	complete	thought. correct.	Ask	yourself:
4.	Read	the	sentences	from	last	to	first	
to	scan	for	other	mistakes. •	“Do	I	need	a	comma	before	this	
conjunction?”
•	“Would	a	dash	work	better	here?”
•	“Did	I	use	quotation	marks	
properly?”
AR70 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   70 10/24/19   12:50 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal: Writers work quietly and independently 
under testing conditions.
Strategy: Using Pronouns Correctly Strategy:  Eliminating Wrong Answers
1.	 First,	think	about	the	word	that	the	 1.	 Read	the	question	carefully.
pronoun	is	replacing.	That’s	called	the	 2.	Read	the	first	answer	choice.	If	you’re	
antecedent. absolutely	certain	it’s	wrong,	eliminate	
2.	Then,	think	about	whether	the	 it—either	on	the	paper	or	just	in	your	
antecedent	is	singular	or	plural,	 head.	If	you’re	not	certain	it’s	wrong,	
masculine	or	feminine	so	you	can	 leave	it	for	later.
match	it	up	with	the	right	pronoun,	 3.	Move	on	to	the	next	answer	choice,	
such	as	he, she, or them. and	repeat	steps	1-2.	(Keep	repeating	
3.	Next,	ask	yourself	if	the	pronoun	is	 this	step	until	you	have	read	all	the	
the	subject	of	a	phrase	or	sentence.	 answer	choices.)
If	the	pronoun	is	a	subject,	choose	a	 4.	Reread	the	question	and	the	answer	
subjective	pronoun,	such	as:	I,	he,	she,	 choices	that	remain.	Choose	the	BEST	
they.	If	it’s	not,	choose	an	objective	 answer.
pronoun,	such	as	me,	him,	her,	them.
Strategy:  Replacing Vague 
Strategy: Deciding How to Correct a Descriptions
Sentence on an Assessment 1.	 Find	the	places	in	your	text	where	you	
1.	 Read	the	passage	and	the	first	 provide	a	description.
question.	
2.	Ask	yourself	if	your	reader	would	
2.	Restate	the	question	to	make	sure	you	 be	able	to	imagine	what	you’re	
understand	what	it	is	asking. describing.
3.	Read	the	choices	and	try	them	out	 3.	If	not,	think	about	words	that	bring	
with	the	passage.	 the	senses	to	life—sight,	taste,	sound,	
4.	Decide	which	answer	choice	makes	 feel,	or	smell.	Ask	yourself:	“Is	there	
the	most	sense. a	sensory	word	I	can	use	to	make	this	
description	more	vivid?”
4.	Revise	the	description	to	make	it	
stronger	and	clearer.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR71
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   71 10/24/19   12:50 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal:  Writers work quietly and independently 
 under testing conditions.
Strategy:  Choosing Comparatives or Strategy: Using a Checklist to Revise
Superlatives 1.	 Look	at	the	notes	you	put	on	your	
1.	 First,	figure	out	what	is	being	 checklist.
compared	—	for	example,	cats,	plants,	 2.	Make	notes	on	your	essay	about	what	
books	in	your	class	library.	 you	could	quickly	change.
2.	Then,	count	how	many	things	are	being	 3.	Make	those	changes.
compared,	such	as	two	cats,	three	
plants,	ten	books. 4.	Remember	to	edit	your	final	version.
3.	If	you	are	comparing	two	things,	use	
the	comparative.	Shorter	comparatives	 Strategy:  Answering Revision 
usually	end	in	–er	(faster)	while	 Questions
longer	ones	are	formed	by	using	more	 1.	 Read	the	passage,	and	give	a	brief	
+	adjective/adverb	(more	playful). summary	of	it.
4.	If	you	are	comparing	more	than	two	 2.	Read	the	question,	and	restate	what	it	
things,	use	the	superlative.	Shorter	 is	asking	you	to	do.
superlatives	usually	end	in	–est	
(greenest)	while	longer	ones	are	 3.	Look	at	the	choices,	and	try	them	out	
usually	formed	by	using	most	+	 with	the	passage.	
adjective/adverb	(most	suspenseful).	 4.	Decide	which	answer	choice	makes	
the	most	sense.
AR72 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   72 10/24/19   12:50 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal: Writers organize and develop their 
writing using familiar strategies.
Strategy:  Using Graphic Organizers to Strategy:  Supporting What You Say 
Plan With Examples
1.	 Think	about	the	central	idea.	Ask	 1.	 Think	about	examples	from	your	own	
yourself:	“How	can	I	use	a	graphic	 life	that	support	your	thinking.
organizer	to	plan	the	possibilities?” 2.	Think	of	examples	you	know	from	
2.	List	the	activities	that	make	you	 other	people’s	lives.
cautious,	adventurous,	or	somewhere	 3.	Talk	about	how	these	examples	either	
in	the	middle. changed	your	thinking	or	made	you	
3.	Look	at	the	activities	you	listed,	and	 even	more	convinced	of	your	idea.
decide	what	kind	of	personality	you	
have.
Strategy:  Choosing a Central Idea
1.	 Test	your	central	idea	to	be	sure	it’s	
Strategy:  Developing a Central Idea something	you	are	comfortable	writing	
1.	 Find	two	or	three	important	words	in	 about.
the	prompt	that	describe	what	the	 2.	Ask	yourself:	
task	requires	you	to	do.
•	Do	I	have	direct	experience	with	this	
2.	Jot	down	your	ideas	that	can	tell	the	 idea?
reader	about	these	important	words.
•	Do	I	feel	strongly	about	this	idea?
3.	Choose	one	idea	that	you	know	the	
most	about. 3.	If	you	answered	no	to	both	questions,	
find	another	central	idea	to	write	
4.	Jot	down	two	or	three	details	about	 about.
this	central	idea.
© 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC AR73
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   73 10/24/19   12:50 PM
STRATEGY BANK
Goal:  Writers organize and develop their 
 writing using familiar strategies.
Strategy:  Supporting Information Strategy:  Choosing Details and 
1.	 Think	about	your	central	idea. Examples with Care
2.	Ask	yourself:	 1.	 Focus	on	a	paragraph	or	section	of	
your	essay.
•	What	is	the	most	important	
information	for	my	reader? 2.	Think	about	the	point	that	you	are	
making.
•	What	details	make	that	information	
clear? 3.	Make	a	list	of	details	and	examples	to	
support	your	point.
•	What	examples	make	that	
information	clear? 4.	Choose	the	detail	or	example	that	
best	supports	your	central	point.
3.	Include	these	details	and	examples	in	
your	essay.
Strategy:  Having a Logical 
Organization
Strategy:  Making Sure Your Story Has 1.	 List	the	main	points	you’re	making	in	
a Point your	essay.
1.	 Jot	down	the	point	your	story	is	
making. 2.	Think	about	how	those	ideas	are	
connected	and	which	transition	words	
2.	Choose	the	way	you	want	to	make	that	 show	those	connections,	such	as	in 
point.	It	could	be	by: addition, because of, as a result, 
•	Having	a	character	state	the	point	in	 and although.
dialogue. 3.	Number	your	ideas	to	show	the	best	
•	Having	the	narrator	make	the	point	 logical	order.
in	narration. 4.	Revise	your	essay	to	present	your	
•	Making	the	reader	infer	the	point	 ideas	in	that	order,	using	the	transition	
based	on	one	or	more	characters’	 words.
actions.
3.	Make	sure	to	include	your	point	in	your	
narrative.
AR74 © 2020 Benchmark Education Company, LLC
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_StrategyBank.indd   74 10/29/19   12:32 PM
Y43339_G5_V2_CV_BC_TEX.indb   1 6/13/19   4:21 PM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
W R I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O PTM
GWradRe 5I T E R ’ S
W O R K S H O P Digital Learning Portal
Volume 1 TM Interactive Resources & Instruction
for Students, Teachers, and Administrators
Writer’s Workshop Kick-Off  
Volume 2 
Writing as a Scientist 
Informational Texts 
Volume 3 
Stories of Growing Up 
Memoirs Benchmark Universe
Volume 4 
Writing as a Historian
Informational Texts
Volume 5 
Test-Taking as a Genre
Volume 6 
Taking a Stand for Our Future
Poetry
Volume 7
Nonfiction Meets Poetry
Informational Poetry 
Y42185 A
Y42185_TRS_G5_V5_BC.indd   2 10/24/19   12:31 PM

